Government of the Russian Federation





National Research University Higher School of Economics



Faculty of Philosophy, School of Asian Studies







MASTER’S THESIS





China’s policy toward students and scholars 

studying and working abroad 1978-2013

 and formation of a new intellectual elite in china







        Written by

 Bakhtina Victoria

Group MA-2

Supervisor

Prof. Marion Wyse

                    



Moscow, 2014



tABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract   4

Introduction   5

Topicality   5

Historiography   6

Research hypothesis and tasks   10

Conceptual framework   11

Chronological framework   13

Theoretical framework   13

Methodology   14

Primary sources   15

Structure of the research   16

Chapter one: Twists and turns of the Chinese State Policy toward scholars and students living abroad since 1978   17

General exit and entry regulations   17

Development of the policy toward Chinese students and scholars   20 

A) The first stage, 1978-1988   21 

B) The second stage, 1989-1999   25

C) The third stage, 2000-2013   29

chapter two: the mentality of overseas chinese   35   

chapter three: overseas chinese scholars and students as a new social elite group   43

The high level of education   43

Working positions and salaries   46

Political representation   48

Social organizations   50

Territorial communities   53

conclusion 57

bibliography   61

appendix 1: statistic data on students going abroad and returning to china   73

appendix 2: reasons and destinations for studying abroad in china   74





































Abstract

This paper analyzes the twists and turns of the PRC’s governmental policies toward overseas Chinese students and scholars after the beginning of the economic reforms in 1978. It also examines the created mechanism of incorporating the returnees into the Chinese social system and considers the returned overseas Chinese as a new intellectual elite. The research has been written on the basis of Chinese main legislation acts while also including materials of the relevant government organizations, and it is based primarily on the concepts of the Systems and Elite theories.  





























INRODUCTION







The era of globalization can be characterized as a completely new system of economic relations. First of all, this new system is based on the strong interactions between countries. As a result of the transformation processes, that have taken place in many developed countries, a new unified international space has appeared. The most important reason of these processes is the increasing mobility of the three main factors of production - capital, labor and information. So in this case migrations of labor force have become one of the main factors of relations between countries and their future economic prosperity. 

The “migration problem” has become one of the most burning issues of the contemporary China. The questions how to attract the most educated and talented overseas Chinese back to the motherland and how to use their experience for economic modernization of the country undoubtedly require the further investigation.

1) Topicality 

After the end of the Cultural Revolution there was an acute shortage of qualified specialists in China. The educational system itself was extremely damaged. In this regard Chinese government under the personal leadership of Deng Xiaoping issued a number of regulations that stimulated students and young scholars to go abroad for study. Subsequently, this policy of “enrichment of brains abroad” was further developed. Young specialists and scholars that decided to come back to the motherland received privileges in employment, guaranteed high salaries and other opportunities to continue their research activities in China. Nowadays, scholars and scientists, who have experience of working in foreign universities and companies, occupy high positions in many government agencies, and many of them have become prominent political figures. 

In time of global economic turmoil, China that has become the second or even the first largest economy in the world has to find new ways of further development.

There is still no strong domestic market in China. First of all, China's economy is an export-oriented economy. In other words, the Chinese industry directly depends on external markets and international economic conditions in general. Thus, the national economy is vulnerable to the global economic crises. In addition, China is on the verge of a crisis of overproduction. This crisis has already affected the steel industry. At the same time, many experts note the shortcomings of Chinese planned economy [Wong, Liu, 2000; Wu, 2004]. Chinese leaders in an attempt to reduce the role of the market in the economy repeatedly committed tactical mistakes.

In this regard, the experience of scholars and scientists who are familiar with the economic and political systems of other countries becomes more and more important. Occupying high positions in government they can contribute much to the future prosperity of their motherland.

In Russia the “drain brain” problem is very urgent too. According to the statement of the chairman of the Labor union of the Russian Academy of Science Victor Kalinushkin, in last ten years from 500 to 800 thousand scientists left the country [Timofeeva, 2009: On-line]. In future Russian government can use the experience of the “eastern neighbor” to attract Russian scientists and artists back to the motherland. 

2) Historiography

There are a lot of various strategies of migration policy that are accepted in many European and Asian countries, and sometimes they are totally different. For example, European countries are maneuvering between the necessity of additional human resources and attempts to preserve the traditional national structure. So, a big shortage of the manpower, on the one hand, and an influx of immigrants from Africa and Asia, on the other hand, generates special attention to the problem of migration in Europe. 

The United State, which national policy is based on the recognition of the total equality, a long time ago began the struggle against the illegal immigration from Latin America. At the same time, the United States has become the symbol of the “American dream”, which includes the idea of an upward social mobility achieved from the hard work. So the opportunity to get a “green card” agitates the souls of millions people all over the world. 

Asian countries are also interested in the development of the general theory of migrations. After the Second World War many countries of this region in order to receive or return the national sovereignty began the policy of assimilation toward immigrants. Thus, many foreigners obtained citizenship or permanent resident status in these countries. Most of them were ethnic Chinese. Now Chinese diaspora controls about 70% of accumulated wealth in the South-East Asia [Larin, 2008]. Moreover, Chinese diaspora comes to only 6% of total population [Ibid]. Chinese business circles have created the largest holdings in Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia and the Philippines. This situation has become one of the main reasons of social tension in these countries. Therefore, the issue of the migration and national policy in this region is also very important. 

The general strategies of migration policy in the XXI century are the subject of many scientific researches. In these works the theoretical issues and characteristics of contemporary migration processes as well as the methods of analysis of migration policy in different countries are given. Scholars provide a wide-ranging, interdisciplinary look at the world migration process, using statistic data. 

The world community has always paid close attention to the “huaqiao issue”. This fact can be explained by the internationalization of the world economy, started in the end of the XIX century. At that time many Chinese began to work on British gold mines in South Africa and Australia or on the construction of the railway system in the USA, especially, in California. Still a lot of Chinese people live in these regions. 

After the First World War many European countries experienced a shortage of manpower. This predetermined the mass migration of Chinese workers to these countries. After the Second World War the national-liberation movements began in Africa and Asia, so the national minorities in these regions were oppressed. So the interest in the problems of migrants once again quickened. From the beginning of the 1980s Chinese economy has started to develop rapidly, and the role of “huaqiao” in this process has become obvious. So many researches have started to investigate the contribution of overseas Chinese to development of their motherland. 

There are a big number of different works on the Chinese diaspora issues in general. The book “China and Overseas Chinese: a study of Peking changing policy, 1949-1979”, written by the famous professor of East Asian studies Charles Patrick Fitzerald, is worthy of notice. It was written in the beginning of 1970s, when economic reforms have just started. In this regard, this book allows us to consider the initial stage of the Chinese emigration from the country, caused be the beginning of the Opening Up policy. Also there are many works on the problem of Chinese migrants in different countries, such as the United States, Canada, Japan, Australia, countries of the South-East Asia. 

In the Chinese scientific circles the attention of scholars has been focused on the compatriots living abroad since the end of the XIX century. However, during the Republican period and after the establishment of the PRC all investigations concerned the huaqiao issues were almost stopped, even despite the fact that the emigrants made a big contribution to all revolutionary activities and supported Chinese military campaigns during the Sino-Japanese war, primarily through financial investments. After the beginning of the Cultural Revolution it was dangerous even to mention the term huaqiao, because of ambiguous attitude of the Chinese leadership to the Chinese people, who were living in other countries, especially in the so-called “capitalist countries”. However, after the beginning of the reform policy and till now the Chinese Diaspora is a permanent research subject in many scientific organizations, state and public structures (for example, Overseas Chinese Affairs Office of the State Council, Overseas Chinese Association, and so on). Many researches concerned the overseas Chinese issues are written by the Chinese scholars that have studying or working experience in other countries. For example, one of the prominent scholars specialized on the Chinese migrations laws Guofu Liu received PhD degree from Sydney University of Technology. His books “Chinese Immigration Law” and “The Right to Leave and Return and Chinese Migration Law” provide a comprehensive and up-to-date reference to Chinese legislation acts in this sphere. 

Russian scholars focus their attention mainly on the role of the Chinese Diaspora in the economic development of China and the problem of migration of Chinese population on the territory of the Russian Far East. Various works are devoted to the so-called “yellow peril problem” and a number of Russian scholars notes the outflow of the most able-bodied Russian population from the region and increasing flow of the Chinese migrants. According to these researches, if the migration continues, the number of the Chinese people at the Far East can reach such level that they would demand representation in the government. At the worst, the Russian government will be obliged to take into account the interests of Chinese population and China in general, and that means a partial loss of sovereignty.

At the same time Russian scholars are interested in adaptation of the Chinese experience in the sphere of migration policy and relations with the Diaspora. It is not a secret, that overseas Chinese that are living all over the world invest much in the economy of their motherland, promote Chinese goods, and share experience, new knowledge and other useful information with their compatriots. Such experience of cooperation between the government and the diaspora deserves further scientific development.     

3) Research hypothesis and tasks

In this research it is hypothesized that the China’s state policy toward students and scholars has promoted the formation of a new social elite group that can influence on the political decision-making process and determine the life of the whole society.

In this regard, the research objectives are as follows:

To analyze the general exit and entrance regulations of the PRC;

To distinguish the initial environment and the main causes of the establishment of the special policy toward Chinese students and scholars working and studying abroad; 

To explore the process of development and implementation of such policy in 1978-2013;

To find out the particular outcomes and adequacy of the final results of the implemented policy;

To outline the main differences (behavior, perception of the world, attitude to the current events, etc.) between overseas Chinese and their compatriots still living on the territory of the PRC;

To analyze the mentality of the returned overseas Chinese;

To explore the present social status of the returned students and scholars in accordance with the accepted definition of the term “social elite” and make a conclusion about the place of the returnees in the social structure of the PRC.

 Thus, the object of this research is the concept of the social elite, and the subject is returned overseas Chinese. 

4) Conceptual framework 

Overseas Chinese: Chinese government has established a special law, which regulates the status of overseas Chinese and their relatives, - The Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of the Rights and Interests of Returned Overseas Chinese and the Family Members of Overseas Chinese. This law was adopted on the 31st of October, 2000 by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress, and came into effect on the 1st of January, 2001. In this law a detailed classification of Chinese citizens, residing in countries other than China, is given. 

First of all, these two categories of overseas Chinese should be mentioned:

“Overseas Chinese” or “Huaqiao” denote Chinese citizens who have settled down abroad. 

“Returned overseas Chinese” or “Guigou huaqiao” denote overseas Chinese who have returned to the country and taken it as their place of permanent residence. 

At the same time, this law contains status regulation of other groups of citizens, namely students who are studying abroad (“huaqiao xuesheng”) and who have already returned to the homeland (“Guigou huaqiao xuesheng”), and relatives of overseas Chinese, who still live on the territory of the PRC (“qiaojuan”). 

In Chinese language there is also a slang term “sea turtle” (“haigui”), which means people that have returned to China after having studied abroad for several years. It is kind of metaphor as sea turtles also travel great distances overseas, but often come back to the motherland. 

So there are special terms in Chinese language and in Chinese laws for these groups of citizens. It means that Chinese government pays special attention to the status and rights of these people.

Sometimes Russian and foreign scholars mention residents of Hong Kong, Taiwan and Macao, when they are talking about overseas Chinese, although the population of these territories in all official documents is called “compatriots” (“tongbao”). This paper does not examine the Beijing’s policy toward inhabitants of these areas, as Hong Kong and Macao became the part of the PRC in 1997 and 1999. Taiwan is also recognized by the Chinese law as a part of the PRC. 

Social elite: The most common definition of the term “social elite” is “a small group of people who control a disproportionate amount of wealth and political power” / “a minority of people that has the monopoly on power and decision-making”. Among scholars that developed this understanding of the term “social elite” are Hungarian sociologist Karl Mannheim and American scholar Amitai Etzioni.

Gaetano Mosca, the first developed of the Elitism Theory, defined the term “social elite” as an organized minority (while the masses are an unorganized majority), which has intellectual, moral and material superiority that highly esteemed and influential.

Elmer Schattschneider, an American political scientist, supposed that in society that consisted of many competing interest groups the pressure system was biased in favor of “the most educated and highest-income members of society”. 

Another group of scholars such as Jose Ortega y Gasset and Vilfredo Pareto defined the term “social elite” as people who reached the highest success in their activities and had the intellectual and moral superiority over the mass as well as the highest sense of responsibility. 

In particular, Vilfredo Pareto, one of the founders of the elite theory, supposed that the society in general was a pyramid, and elite was at the top of this pyramid. So, according to his theory, social elite was a leading social layer that guided the life of the whole society. The guarantee of the successful development of the society was regular rotation of the elite.

So relaying on these theories the term “social elite” can be defined as “a small well-organized group of most educated and highest-income people that influence much on the decision-making process and can determine the life of the whole society”. This research is based on this understanding of the term “social elite”.

Moreover, this research focuses generally on the representatives of the intellectual elite, thus refers to overseas Chinese scholars and future potential researchers that have certain scientific knowledge and experience of working in other countries.

5) Chronological framework

The main outflow of students and scholars from the territory of the PRC has begun since the establishment of the Opening Up policy in 1978. From that moment the Chinese leadership have made several attempts to strengthen relations with the Chinese Diaspora and designed a number of official programs aimed at attracting the most talented Chinese people back to the motherland. Prior to this, the attention of the Chinese government was focused mainly on the prevention of the social unrest among   overseas Chinese, as well as on the search of investments and other economic benefits from the Diaspora.     

6) Theoretical framework

The multi-disciplinary nature of this research has required adopting at least two broad theories – the Systems theory and the Elite theory.

This research is based mainly on the concepts of the Systems theory. The framework of the Systems theory based on the assumption that different parts of the system can be understood much better through the analysis of their relations with each other and with other systems. In such case, this theory is a very good tool to understand how systems behave, interact with the environment, and influence each other. 

One of the proponents of the application of the Systems theory to the analysis of the public policy David Easton regards public policy as an output of the political system. He has also developed a model for the analysis of the policy-making process that consists of five main parts: inputs, conversion (or transformation of the inputs into outputs), outputs, feedback and environment [Easton, 1991]. Therefore, the systems model can help to explore the certain feedback (inputs, results, consequences) of the accepted policies toward overseas Chinese students and scholars and how the final results have been adopted in the present political system. 

As far as the hypothesis of this research concerns the concept “social elite”, the Elite theory is also applied in this work, particularly, the main definitions of the term “social elite”. Besides other distinctive features of the concept of “elite”, in this research the place of overseas Chinese in political system of the PRC is also under consideration. 

7) Methodology       

As far as each research strategy has its limitations, and it is hard to find an adequate single method for the complete analysis of the whole range of the collected data, so the only way out is to adopt a multi-disciplinary approach that combines different research methods. 

On the first stage of investigation the Retrospective Approach was applied. This research method can help to show the factors related to the development of a particular outcome and cause-and-effect relations between these factors and the final results. Also this method is usually used after the outcomes have already occurred. If we talk about the policy toward the overseas Chinese students and scholars it is very important to analyze the reasons of implementation of such policy and the initial environment in the beginning of the investigations. It helps to understand the nature of this policy and make a conclusion about the adequacy of the final results. 

Furthermore, on the second stage the method of Periodization was applied to define stages in the development process of the policy toward students and scholars. This method helps to determine periods of time with relatively stable characteristics for more convenience understanding of explored process.  

The overall approach combined both qualitative and quantitative research methods. The majority of the studies concerned returned overseas Chinese and migration issues in general, including this thesis, are quantitative, as far as, for example, the number of the returnees in the beginning of the reforms is comparing with the final numbers of the returned migrants after the implementation of the certain policy. However, this thesis is also based on the qualitative methods, such as conceptualization, formalization and analytical induction, which help to describe, understand and explain certain empirical data. 

William N. Dann in his book Public Policy Analysis introduced three methods of policy analysis, namely prospective, retrospective, and integrated analysis [Dunn, 1994]. The Retrospective Policy Analysis involves the production and transformation of information after policy actions have been taken. One of the sum-methods of this type of analysis that is called Problem Oriented Analysis seeks to describe mainly the causes and consequences of the policy, in this research the retrospective approach was applied as far as this research focused generally on the impacts of the existing repatriation policy in China. 

8) Primary sources    

The main sources of information for this research can be divided into three main groups: 1) legislation acts; 2) documents of government structures; 3) statistic data, presented by official agencies.

The main source of information for this research is various legislation acts concerned the overseas Chinese students and scholars that have been promulgated since 1978 by the Chinese governmental bodies (Ministry of Education, State Council, National People’s Congress). The whole list of used legislation in chronological order can be found in bibliography.

Furthermore, one of the sources of information is the materials that are presented on the web-sites of governmental and non-governmental organizations involved in the overseas Chinese affairs in China and other countries. 

The paper also analyzes statistic data introduced by the official governmental structures, such as the Ministry of Education and the Chinese Bureau of Statistics. 

This thesis is mostly based on the materials of the Chinese government agencies and official statistic data. In many cases the official Chinese statistics are not completely reliable, as data presented by the Chinese governmental structures may be falsified for political purposes. However, even beside the hard evidence on data manipulation, the final results of the research seem to be legitimate. On the next stage of the research the available information is going to be verified through the “field investigations” and involvement of independent experts and the overseas Chinese scholars themselves. 

9) Structure of the research

This research consists of introduction, three chapters and conclusion:

In the introduction are stated the topicality, research hypothesis and tasks, conceptual, theoretical and methodological frameworks of investigation.

The first chapter explores the process of development of the policy toward the Chinese students and scholars working and studying abroad from 1978 till 2013. In this part of the research are analyzed the main reasons of the implementation of such policy, as well as found out results and consequences on the each stage of policy’s implementation.

In the second chapter are outlined the main differences in perception of the world between overseas Chinese and their compatriots in China, and made the conclusion about the mental potential of the returnees that can make them the main driving force of future development of the country.  

Finally, the last chapter explores the current social status of the returned overseas Chinese students and scholars in accordance with the accepted definition of the term “social elite”.























CHAPTER ONE

TWISTS AND TURNS OF THE CHINESE STATE POLICY TOWARD SCHOLARS AND STUDENTS LIVING ABROAD SINCE 1978





Since the early 1980s the level of external migration from the People’s Republic of China (PRC) has increased much due to the significant domestic economic reforms and the vigorous involvement in globalization process. Contrary to the rather cool attitude of the Chinese authorities toward overseas Chinese before 1978, the Chinese state now is actively seeking to retain transnational ties to the millions of ethnic Chinese living in other countries.  

This chapter explores the twists and turns of Chinese policies toward overseas Chinese scholars and students studying and living abroad in response to China’s
international position and novel internal political situation.

1) General Entry and Exit regulations

In 1966, by the General Assembly of the United Nations was adopted the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, in which the
Right to leave and return (RLR) was affirmed as a fundamental human
right. In other words, according to the RLR, anyone can freely leave
any country and freely return to any country, including one’s own.
Despite that, each state has the sovereign right to regulate the RLR
in accordance with its own laws [Quoted by Foldesi, 1993]. The Covenant was signed by the PRC only in 1998 (while the Republic of China signed it up in 1967), and it is still not ratified [International Services for Human Rights, 2013: On-line]. Although since 1978 and the beginning of the economic reforms the Chinese leadership has changed its attitude toward the RLR, the protection of the initial human right to move in China still remains on the lower level than in the rest of the world.

Nowadays the Chinese regulatory framework governing the RLR includes the Chinese migration law, the Constitution, and Chinese exit and entry administrative law. However, the Chinese government has not yet proclaimed any regulations that use the terms “immigration” or “emigration”, as well as “migration” in general [Guofu, 2005]. 

The main law, which regulates the exit and entry of the Chinese citizens, The Law on the Control of the Exit and Entry of Citizens was adopted by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress in November 1985. According to this document, Chinese citizens may leave the Chinese territory whenever they want, except several cases. For example, the approval to leave the country will not be granted to persons whose exit from China will be harmful to state security or cause a major loss to national interests, defendants in criminal cases or criminal suspects confirmed by a public security department, people undergoing rehabilitation through labor, and so on [Ibid].

According to the law, five categories of overseas Chinese are eligible to apply for a permanent residence on the territory of the PRC: 1) widows and orphans of the Chinese citizens that can resolve their employment and housing needs only in China, but without the assistance of the State; 2) retired overseas Chinese that have pensions or property in China and can resolve their housing needs with the support of their relatives; 3) overseas Chinese that are persecuted in their residing country and thus cannot support themselves; 4) overseas Chinese that want to come back to the motherland for permanent residence within the short period of time after leaving the PRC and who can resolve their housing and employment needs without any help from the government; 5) overseas Chinese that have high level of education and whose specialization is demanding in China [Chinese Government’s Official Web Portal: On-line]. 

The first four categories of overseas Chinese that apply for a permanent residence on the territory of the PRC need to provide many documents, including pension certificates, the evidence of the relationship between them and their sponsors in China, certificates of the property rights, and so on. Such rigid restrictions can be explained by the concerns of the Chinese government about the large population of the PRC that poses a challenge to economic development. Overseas Chinese that cannot prove that their specialization will meet the needs of the labor market might be prohibited from returning to the motherland. The only exception is the overseas Chinese professionals that are studying or working abroad. In later legislation acts their right to return was iteratively confirmed.

The new enter and exit regulations that were almost the revised edition of the legislations adopted in 1985 took effect in June 2013. These regulations are aimed to attract more foreign professionals, including those overseas Chinese that have already become citizens of another country. 

According to the new exit and entry system, the new type of visa was established – “a talent introduction visa”. The new R visa is now issued to foreign professionals, “who are either highly skilled or whose skill is urgently needed by China” [National People’s Congress of the PRC: On-line]. Thus, with this policy the Chinese government has created a friendlier environment for foreign talents to work in China. However, the new regulation system does not mention, what kind of “talents” Chinese government is looking for. To apply for R-type visa those professionals should submit the appropriate supporting documents that verify their high qualification and meet the relevant requirements of the competent authorities of the Chinese government. 

The new type of visa was also established for foreign citizens who apply for entry into China for family unification with Chinese relatives. The “family reunion visa” is intended for a long term visits that last more than 180 days. These Q-type visas are created in response to requests of overseas Chinese to simplified exit and entry procedures. Thus, the L-type visas now are limited to tourism purposes only, and now they are issued for foreigners that are going to China for tourism and personnel affairs [Quoted by the Embassy of the PRC in the USA: On-line]. 

In such a way, Chinese government in all possible ways tries to make the entry/exit regulations more convenient for overseas Chinese that are intending to come back to the motherland. The changes, which were included into regulations last year, show that the Chinese leadership treats with respect to all requests of the overseas Chinese and their families. However, the rigid restrictions on the returning of unqualified overseas Chinese to the PRC demonstrate what exactly Chinese government is expecting from repatriation. The fact that only high-skilled workers can come back to China without any restrictions shows that China is interested in specialists from foreign countries.

2) Development of the special policy toward overseas Chinese scholars

The program of economic reforms that was started in 1978 by the Communist Party of China (CPC) led by Deng Xiaoping has resulted in enormous changes in Chinese society. Moreover, Deng Xiaoping made an unprecedented strategic decision to open up Chinese borders for students and young scientists who intended to study or work abroad. In such a way he planned to form new intellectual elite since the number of talented scholars in the country decreased much after the social upheaval of the Cultural Revolution. This decision was indeed very brave for that time: Mao Zedong never renounced the possibility of using the resources of the Chinese Diaspora for his own purposes, but relatives of the Chinese emigrants and returnees, especially from the so-called “capitalist” countries, were often suspected of being foreign spies [Thuno, 2001]. The attitude toward overseas Chinese before the beginning of the Opening up Policy in such a way was highly controversial, primarily due to the class affiliation of the Chinese people that were living in other countries.   

Since that time many young Chinese people got the opportunity to go abroad for study, and there was so many students interested in such opportunity that the brain drain problem could become true as not all young people returned home after studying abroad. 

According to the statistic data presented in the Chinese Educational Statistics Yearbook in 1997 only 32% of approximately 250,000 students who had gone abroad for study since 1978 returned to their motherland [China Social Statistical Yearbook, 2006: 17]. Perhaps, 250,000 people seem insignificant for such country as China with one of the biggest population in the world, however these young people to some extant can be regarded as bearers of new culture and new experience that are so necessary for China in the years of reforms. 

Moreover, in the beginning of the Opening Up policy only the most talented young people could get a scholarship for studying abroad [For more information, please, see below], and after the Cultural Revolution not many people in China could pay a quite big amount of money for a foreign education of their children. So the question how to attract the most talented young people back to the motherland was very significant since the beginning of the reform era in China. 

A) The first stage, 1978-1988

Some steps in this direction were made by the Chinese leadership just after the beginning of the economic reforms. Particular attention was paid to students and young scholars that were studying and working abroad at that time. 

To support the implementation of the new projects in 1979 a special administrative unit was established, namely The Overseas Chinese Affairs Office of the State Council of the PRC. This unit is still responsible for communication with the overseas Chinese residing abroad, and its main aim is to “protect the legitimate rights and interests of the overseas Chinese” [Chinese Government’s Official Web Portal: On-line]. Also the Office together with the China Scholarship Council is developing special scholarships and grants for the most talented Chinese scholars and students that are intending to study or working abroad. 

In 1979 a special legislation was issued – Provisional Regulations on the Affairs of Chinese Students Studying Abroad. These regulations were jointly adopted by the Ministry of Education, the State Science and Technology Commission and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The year after, the main statements of this document were confirmed iteratively in the Report on the Management of the Overseas Chinese Students Affairs that was forwarded by the State Council to the Ministry of Education, Culture and Foreign Affairs. 

The main goal of the new acts was to encourage talented student to study abroad as well as to facilitate the procedure of going through all necessary formalities. Moreover, the number of governmental scholarships and grants designed for student and scholars increased much. 

These documents were created with the assistance of Deng Xiaoping who truly believed that China should at the shortest possible time catch up to the West in the field of science and technology. His wish became the lasting basis for the future policy toward students and scholars studying and working abroad.  

Deng Xiaoping in his youth spent some time in France, and, perhaps, his own experience let him realize how important was the role of young people studying abroad for further development of the country. He was personally involved in the process of the implementation of the new policy and under his leadership the number of young people, who received the opportunity to study abroad, increased significantly. Only during 1979 about 1,750 students went to foreign countries for study, and this number exceeded the total figure for previous five years [Li, 2010: 276]. 

Over the next few years since 1978 till 1983 the Chinese Ministry of Education with the support of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs signed up several agreements concerning educational exchanges with the U.S., Great Britain, France, Germany, Japan and many other countries all over the world [Ibid]. The participation of the officials from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs indicates that these agreements were important for Chinese leadership. These agreements allowed an increasing number of Chinese students to study in prestigious foreign universities. 

The vast majority of the total number of Chinese students studying abroad at that time was sponsored by the government and state companies that had an opportunity to send the most talented workers to foreign countries for training. According to the statistic data presented in the Educational Statistics Yearbook of China in 1998 from 1978 to 1987 only 20% of the total number of overseas Chinese students was studying abroad at their own expense [China Social Statistical Yearbook, 2006: 17]. 

In 1980 the Working Conference on the Affairs of Students Studying Abroad was held with the assistance of the officials from the Ministries of Education, Finance, Culture, Foreign Affairs, Science and Technology Cadre Bureau of the State Council and the Chinese Academy of Science. The resolution of this conference was that “the knowledge and the experience of the Chinese students studying abroad had crucial importance for the realization of the Four Modernization Policy” [Quoted by Zhongguo Zhigongdang: On-line].  

In this regard next year was announced that self-funded students are equalized in rights with the students that are studying abroad at public expense. These regulations were reflected in two documents published that year: Instruction for Students that Go Abroad for Study at their own Expense and Interim Regulations for Students that Go Abroad for Study at their own Expense. Later these two documents were revised and compiled in a new document The Interim Provisions of the State Council of the PRC about Self-funded Students Studying Abroad that was published in 1984.

In this document several main theses were stated: 1) after graduation all students could return to China and get working positions from the local authorities (depending on where they were living, working or studying before going abroad) according to their achievements; 2) self-funded students had equal rights with state-funded students and could get same working places and salaries; 3) self-funded students that did not have degree after studying abroad could get working position from the local authorities according to their skills and knowledge. Thus, the Chinese government intended to stimulate students that had an opportunity to study abroad at their own expense. This fact demonstrated how important were young people that had experience of studying abroad for Chinese leadership at that time. 

In December 1986 a new important document was developed by the Ministry of Education – Several Provision Regulations of the State Education Comission for Personnel Working Abroad. In this document several main thesis were stated: 1) new principles of studying abroad were announced: state support for going abroad, guarantee of education high quality, consistency between study and practice; 2) moreover, Chinese government took an obligation to make the best conditions of living and working in China for those students that would come back to the motherland after graduation; 3) those self-funded students that would receive academic awards after the graduation could expect that part of their tuition fees would be returned to them by the employer. 

At the same time this act was accompanied by the special list of standards for those who could undergo training in foreign universities at public expense. These standards can be divided in two main groups: political and professional. Only young people that are loyal to Chinese government with high academic achievements could get a scholarship from the government. Other important factors are good mental and physical health and knowing of foreign languages. In other words, according to this document only young and most talented people could go abroad for study at public expense, so the brain drain problem was a real burning issue for that time.  

On the initial stage of the development of the policy toward students and scientists studying and working abroad were made several main steps. First of all, on this stage Chinese government led by Deng Xiaoping showed a big interest in students and scientists living in foreign countries. Furthermore, because of the active work of the Ministry of Education with the support of the Ministry of the Foreign Affairs the number of Chinese students going abroad increased much during the decade from 1978 till 1988. However, not many students decided to come back to China, primarily because of the undeveloped system of social welfare. Especially it concerned self-funded students: according to statistic data the return rate among them was less than 4% from 1978 till 1998 [See App. 1, Picture 1], even despite the fact that self-funded students had equal rights with state-funded students. On the next stage of the development of the policy toward students and scholars living abroad the Chinese leadership was forced to find new ways to attract intellectuals back to the motherland. 

B) The second stage, 1989-1999

Since the early 1990s with the development of Chinese economy the number of students studying abroad on their own expense has increased several times. More and more people began to receive steady incomes that let them pay the tuition fees for their children studying in foreign countries. Furthermore, with the implementation of a new Exit-Entrance system in 1985 disappeared many formalities that previously prevented some students to go abroad.     

However, after the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 the number of young people wishing to come back to China after graduation decreased sharply [See App. 1, Picture 1]. Moreover, the attitude of the Chinese government toward Overseas Chinese changed much: the mass protests of the Chinese citizens abroad caused a negative reaction of the Chinese leadership. 

In 1992 on the Changchun International Film Festival the Vice-Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress Litie Ying announced three main principles of a new policy toward students and scholars studying and working abroad: “zhichi liuxue, guli huiguo, laiqu ziyou” (comprehensive support for students studying abroad, encouragement their return to China, protection of the right to leave and return). These principles were ratified on the 3rd Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee [Wang, 2005].  

Moreover, this year the State Council of the PRC issued the so-called Notice on Issues Related to Students Studying Abroad. It was a kind of appeal to all Chinese citizens residing abroad: they were called up to come back to China immediately. In their turn Chinese officials promised to shut their eyes to the activities of individual students during the unrest of 1989 if they ceased to engage in any anti-government organizations. 

Officials on all levels of government were instructed to provide any possible help to students that intended to come back to the motherland after studying abroad. Furthermore, Chinese embassies in all countries pledged to protect the rights of Chinese students in other countries. Officials working in the Chinese embassies were instructed to conduct propaganda work among students and provide them the latest information about the achievements of the Chinese leadership. 

Moreover, in the early 1990s the Chinese leadership supported the establishment of local Chinese schools depending on the country and the number of residing ethnic Chinese. Special teaching materials were elaborated, and about 150 teachers were sent from the PRC to teach Chinese in other countries. Also several thousand teachers that were living abroad received Chinese teaching training in China [Thuno, 2001: 924].

In 1993 the State Council of the PRC with the support of the Central Committee of the CPC made an official decision to support the return of Chinese students and scholars after a full course of study abroad back to the motherland. In this regard was prepared a set of documents proposing high salaries for specialists who had studied in foreign universities. For realization of this program were created several special organizations within the Ministry of Education, the State Science and Technology Commission and the Overseas Chinese Affairs Office of the State Council and many nongovernmental organizations that controlled students’ employment issues [Ibid]. 

In 1994 in Nanjing was created the first Science and Technology Park for overseas Chinese students that decided to return to the motherland [Barabantseva, 2005]. The park consolidated local research institutes, and in such a way was created a financial and scientific platform to support the start-ups of the returnees. On the territory of the park returnees could find whatever they needed – not only low rent and tax benefits offering by almost all science parks in China, but also special features that addressed the needs of returnees, such as accommodation and bilingual schools for their children. Since 1994 several tens of such parks have been founded specifically for returnees. According to the statistic data, in 2003 there were 110 Overseas Students Parks, and now the number of industrial parks of this kind is more than 160 with about 8,000 business that provide working positions for returning students [Walcott, 2003: 78]. 

To attract attention of the student and young scholars to the opportunity of studying abroad, in 1995 the Chinese government published new special regulations – Reformed approach to the selection of the students studying abroad at public expense. In this document new principles of the selection of the state-funded students were announced, namely “open selection, equal competition, expert evaluation, admission of the best candidates”. Initially, this approach was declared as experimental and came in force only on the territory of two provinces – Jiangsu and Jilin, but as early as the next year this document came in force on the territory of the whole country. In 1996 more than 2,000 students were selected according to new approach and went abroad at public expense [Thuno, 2001: 926]. Moreover, the most important part of this document concerned compensation that could be demanded by the Chinese government from the state-funded students that went abroad for studying. So every student that received a scholarship from the government was obliged to sign up a special agreement that forced him to return to China after graduation or serve the motherland in other ways. 

Moreover, in 1995 for further propaganda work a special web-site were established with the support of Chinese government. It was called “Scholars Abroad. Electronic Edition” and all the articles there were written in Chinese language. On this web-site Chinese students that were living far from the motherland could read the latest news about the achievements of the Communist Party, so students themselves called this web-site the “Voice from Beijing” [Ministry of Education: On-line].

In addition to written propaganda, the Chinese government started a new political campaign under the title “going out and inviting in” (zou chu qu, qing ginlai), according to which official invitations and special delegations were sent to the most prominent ethnic Chinese that were working abroad at that time.

In 1998 the Ministry of Education decided to carry out special celebration devoted to the 20th anniversary of the beginning of the reforms. The Minister of Education Chen Zhili on the conference organized by the State Council Information Office for the journalists announced that more and more young people that had studied abroad were working in the main universities, scientific research institutes and even took up high-ranking posts in the government. She also added that the Chinese leadership would continue to do everything in its power to make the best conditions for those students that would decide to come back to the motherland after graduation [China Scholars Abroad: On-line].  

As the result of this policy the increasing number of students decided to go abroad for study at their own expense. According to the China Educational Statistics Yearbook in 2002 about 94% (about 117, 000) of all students studying abroad went to foreign country at their own expense. However, at the same time the number of students that came back after graduation decreased much: only 30% of about quarter million students decided to come back to China, and only 3.5% of self-funded students returned to the motherland after the end of the study [See App. 1, Picture 2]. 

Despite the significant economic and political progress, in the end of the 1990s the Chinese government was not able to develop an active program to attract Chinese specialists back to the motherland. Still, Chinese people who lived abroad chose not to return to China. In this case, Chinese leaders, first, decided to continue ideological propagandistic work among Chinese students and scholars living abroad. Second, they put forward a new idea that Chinese young specialist after graduation could “serve the motherland in various ways”. It meant that students and scholars working and studying abroad, primarily at public expense, were encouraged to take an active part in the development of China wherever they were living. Thus, China could get the necessary knowledge and experience form the most advanced foreign research centers, and young Chinese people got an opportunity to choose where they want to live. This idea became more and more popular in the beginning of the 2000s, and it was confirmed by the Ministry of Education in 2001.

C) The third stage (1999-2013)

By the early 2000s China was ready for more flexible policy toward Chinese students studying abroad and toward the Chinese Diaspora in general. New leadership of China has decided to gamble on the human potential realizing that it is not enough to attract investments of the Diaspora. 

In May 2001, prior to China’s accession to the World Trade Organization, the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Personnel with the support of the State Science and Technology Commission prepared the document under the title Solutions to Encouraging Chinese Students to Serve the Motherland in Various Ways. 

In accordance with this document Chinese students were urged “to serve the nation”, getting experience in foreign companies or starting their own business abroad. From that moment Chinese students were officially allowed to stay abroad: now qualified specialist even working abroad could keep his job in China too. These regulations mainly concern academics and scholars that were engaged in active scientific work. They were also encouraged to take part in conferences and advisory committees in China: for that they could receive a variety of financial benefits and premiums for long term-research projects. The Chinese leadership in its turn engaged to develop patent system and protect interests of Chinese researchers living abroad.

So the idea that first appeared even in the end of the 1990s was officially confirmed be the Ministry of Education and officially allowed more than 600,000 of Chinese scholars working abroad to continue their investigations in foreign universities without any serious consequences [Thuno, 2001: 926]. 

Over time, the situation is slowly beginning to change. According to materials that were published in the newspaper “China’s Youth Daily” in 2004 about 90% of Chinese students that were studying abroad at that time intended to come back to the motherland [China’s Youth Daily: On-line]. 

Furthermore, according to the statistic data presented by the Ministry of Education in 2004 about 115,000 students go abroad for study, and among them more than 100,000 students were self-funded. Moreover, officially about 25,000 of students studying on foreign universities came back to China in the same year. On the whole, from 1978 till 2004 the total number of students studying abroad was 814,884 people, and 197,884 of them returned home after graduation [China Social Statistical Yearbook, 2004: 17]. 

In 2008 the national “Thousand Talents Plan” was launched by the Chinese leadership. Since that time almost every year is announced a new annual plan that is aimed to recruit the most talented scholars from many foreign countries to work in Chinese universities and scientific centers. 

The long-term program offers full-time positions to the overseas Chinese scholars under 50-55 years old that “hold a current professorship in a distinguished international university or an equivalent in international research institution” [Quoted by University of Chinese Academy of Science: On-line] and awards them grants of 2 million and 1 million RMB respectively. While the short-term program offers part-time positions to the same group of the overseas Chinese scholars and awards them grants of 500 thousand RMB [Ibid]. Moreover, non-Chinese researchers can apply for this program along with the overseas Chinese scholars [Wei, Sun, 2012]. It means that they also can take up posts of principle investigators on important national projects. 

In 2010 the special Circular of the General Office of the State Council Concerning Matters Relating to Students Studying Abroad was published. In this document previous regulation concerned overseas Chinese students were summarized: 1) the Chinese leadership one more time stated that the Chinese students studying in foreign universities were “the treasures of the State”; 2) all students were welcome to come back to the motherland regardless their political position in the past; 3) local authorities were encouraged to “adopt specific measures to make it convenient for students studying abroad to come home, simplify entry and exit formalities and make proper arrangements for work and lives of returned students”. 

On the basis of this circular the central government announced the launch of a new long-term National Talent Development Plan. The main aim of this plan was the formation of “a highly skilled national work force” during the decade from 2010 till 2020 and conversion of China into a world leader in innovations through the increase of the number of highly skilled workers from 114 million to 180 million by 2020 [Simon, Cao, 2009: 215].

The project of the development plan was established by the Central Committee of the CPC and the State Council in June 2010. The participation of two high ranking governmental body showed the importance of the new project for the Chinese leadership. Furthermore, on the official national-televised announcement of the Development Plan president of the PRC Hu Jintao declared that “talent is the most important resource and it is a key issue that concerns the development of the Party and country” [Quoted by China Daily: On-line]. This plan became the core of all legislations concerning the policy toward overseas Chinese students and scholars. 

In October 2013 the National Project to Provide Support to the Post-Graduate Student was announced by the country’s top personnel administration, and the China Scholarship Council was appointed as the responsible authority. According to this document, in 2014 more than 7000 post-graduate students, including 4500 doctoral students, will be sent to the best foreign universities at public expense. However, only young scholars under 35 years old with high scientific achievements can take part in such program. Moreover, special privileges are granted to students who have already studied abroad for a long time. Among other things candidates need to know two or more foreign languages. First of all, they need to have fluent English language; moreover, they also need to know one of the following languages: German, French, Russian, Japanese, Italian or Spanish. Furthermore, all candidates are obliged to sign up an agreement that they are engaged to come back to China after graduation and work for Chinese government or in private company on the territory of the PRC. 

In other words, in the 2000s was made a completely new step in development of the policy toward Chinese scholars working abroad. The Chinese leadership finally understood that it was almost impossible to attract students back to the motherland, and it was much easier just to receive their knowledge and experience by other ways: short-term training courses in Chinese companies and educational institutions, participation in expert commissions and work groups in China, and so on. Finally, the slogan of “returning to serve the country” (huiguo fuwu) was officially replaced by another one – “serving the country” (wei guo fuwu) [Quoted by Simon, Cao, 2009]. Although the Chinese government continues to develop new facilities to attract overseas Chinese scholars, however it gambles more on the free participation of the foreign scholars in economic and scientific activities in China through various exchange programs and simplified entry/exit regulations.

***

The PRC, despite its impressive economic progress is still a developing country in term of social improvements: the welfare system is still far from covering all groups of citizens. Moreover, education and medical services still remain on a low level. Like all other developing countries China continues to face an acute shortage of qualified specialists that able to make quick decisions in a changing global economic environment. Meanwhile, China is losing its most talented scientists who prefer to live and work in more developed countries. 

Since the beginning of economic reforms Chinese leadership has made several attempts to encourage Chinese students to go abroad for study: 1) the Ministry of Education with the support of the Ministry of the Foreign Affairs concluded several agreements concerning educational exchanges with the U.S., Great Britain, France, Germany, Japan, and many other countries; 2) the number of different research grants and scholarships awarded to students with the best academic achievements increased much; 3) the Chinese government provided students studied abroad guaranteed employment with adequate salaries; 4) self-funded students were granted equal rights with state-funded students. 

Due to these measures, the number of students went abroad for study increased much. However, at the same time the Chinese leadership met with another obstacle: not all of the young people studying or working abroad decided to come back to the motherland. So in the 1990s the Chinese government had an acute question how to attract most talented overseas Chinese scholars and scientists to China. For that an active propaganda work among Chinese students abroad were held:  special journals, newspapers and electronic editions were created to provide overseas students with the latest information about the economic and political achievements of the Chinese government, more and more delegations were sent abroad to strengthen ties with the overseas Diaspora, and so on. The leadership of the country was interested much in overseas Chinese with working experience to come back to China and run high-tech enterprises. To achieve this goal, special industrial zones were established to attract returned overseas Chinese and provide them with all necessary facilities for living and for business. The Chinese scholars and specialists that returned to China were provided with working positions and high salaries. More and more new organizations supported overseas Chinese were established all over the country for various groups of returnees. 

However, not many overseas Chinese were inspired by these programs and came back to China. Although in the 2000s the Chinese government continued to develop different stimulating programs aimed at attracting overseas Chinese back to the motherland, however finally the Chinese authorities decided to use the experience and skills of overseas Chinese without returning them to the country. New programs of the short-term visits and participation in expert commissions were established, and the new simplified visa system was designed specifically for overseas talents. It was a completely new approach in the development of the policy toward the human resources of the Diaspora. The overseas Chinese scholars received an opportunity to hold their positions in foreign universities and research centers, but at the same time they could take part in further development of the country. 

There are still many issues that still demand solution. Perhaps, now the Chinese leadership needs to focus all the attention on the already-returned talents, rather than to attract more and more overseas Chinese specialists into the country. Especially, when there is no adequate assurance that returnees have supportive working environment. However, even taking all these factors into account, China’s last initiatives accepted by the central government and local authorities are likely to be more successful than the earlier programs. 









































CHAPTER TWO

THE MENTALITY OF OVERSEAS CHINESE





Scientists began to study the process of cultural interactions only in the end of the 19th century. The first serious researches on this issue were published in the late 1880s, when there was the barest necessity to investigate the process of cultural changes in the tribes of the North American Indians [Herskovits, 1937]. With the beginning of the labor migration boom in the early 20th century this topic received further development, especially in the United States and European countries. During the American Civil War in 1861-1865 more than 600 thousand people died and infrastructure of the South was destroyed. The same situation was in Europe after the First World War in 1914-1918. During this period the influx of labor migrants was marked. So scientists of these countries were interested in the cultural interactions between the local population and foreign migrants. Thereupon, a new term “acculturation” has appeared. Acculturation refers to the process “in which individuals negotiate two or more cultures” [Yeh, 2003: 35]. This process is always very dynamic: immigrants interact with a new environment and often have to change their behavioral patterns to meet new social standards. Thus, the term “acculturation” can also be defined as “changes in an individual's behavior, social and work activities, thinking patterns, values ​​and self-identification as a result of contact with another culture” [Sam, 2000: 7]. In this regard this term should be distinguished from the term “assimilation”, which means a complete loss of language and cultural peculiarities.  

It is important to notice that the term “huaqiao” appeared after the establishment of the Republic of China in 1911 [Vasantkumar, 2012]. From this moment we can talk about the Chinese nation-state. Now such definitions as “huaqiao” and “overseas Chinese” refer to all natives of China, regardless of their actual ethnicity. It is quite well known that on the territory of the PRC live 56 different ethnic nationalities. According to Communique of the National Bureau of Statistics, the Chinese that belong to ethnic group “han” make up 91% of total population [National Bureau of Statistics, 2010: On-line]. Thus, all general researches, related to the phenomenon of huaqiao, focus mainly on this ethnic group. The cultural features of this ethnic group have appeared under the influence of the three main doctrines – Confucianism, Taoism and Buddhism, which have determined the Chinese mentality. 

Although many different dialects still exist in China (many of them are significantly different from each other in term of phonetics), all Chinese dialect groups use the same Chinese characters. Therefore, hieroglyphic writing is a strong glue of the whole Chinese cultural sphere and one of the main factors that determine the Chinese way of thinking. 

The Chinese culture is extremely rich in local differences that often are very strong. If the European culture is based on the doctrine of the original sin and the primordial human sinfulness, that has come from Christianity and changed slightly during the Renaissance, the Chinese cultural basis is much less clear. Nevertheless, we can find a certain core, which has become the main base for the development of Chinese contemporary mentality. 

The core of Chinese culture is often defined as a commitment to collaborative and harmonious life. Any Chinese on the question what is the highest value do not hesitate to answer: the consent or harmony (“he”) between people [Maljavin, 2007]. In China for centuries the collective interests have always considered to be much more important than the interests of the single individual. Therefore, such concepts as identity and individuality have not been developed in China.  

Apart from a large number of regional differences in recent years the impact of modernization and westernization on Chinese society can be marked. The differences between city dwellers and peasants have increased. Not so long ago under the increasing influence of the Western world have appeared new social groups, which representatives have completely broke away from traditional system. However, they still remain Chinese: they consider themselves as “bearers” of Chinese culture, and the rest of the world perceives them as natives of China. 

In many respects it is closely related to the fact that Chinese people pay much attention to the “symbolic forms of communication”, such as all sorts of courtesy, normative gestures, body language and other symbolic ways to express wide range of emotions and feelings [Ibid]. In Chinese literature we can find a lot of various methods of hints, allusions and hidden passages, which are often beyond the comprehension of European people. At the same times all these techniques are significantly different from conventional methods as metaphors, antithesis, epithets, etc., known by Western writers. 

A good example of this symbolism is Chinatown. Every Chinatown is a special space, filled with signs and tokens that outsiders cannot understand. Chinese Diasporas live in a complete system of signs and symbols. These communities are not closed for strangers, but they are totally self-contained systems, precisely because of their symbolic structure. Foreigners can live in this system, however without special fund of knowledge they cannot understand even a tenth of what is happening around them. 

At the same time, Chinese people perceive their social environment as an important part of their lives and even destinies. Society that surrounds them evaluates the merits and demerits of its individual members. This is based on the conception that every person can meet his deserts even in this life, trough the attitude of the society, in which he lives. Such representation allows Chinese society to regulate the behavior of its members, so it is considered to be better that Western doctrine of the retribution for the sins in the afterlife.   

Moreover, the Chinese really believe in social institutions, so all kinds of relations between them are very strong [James, 1997]. This fact can explain, in particular, the success of Chinese emigrants in such sphere as commerce. Their competitors from local population are most often involved in internal conflicts, while the Chinese work as a united and cohesive mechanism.

Thus, the basic category of the Chinese perception of the world is not an individual, but a sort of community, which has hierarchical nature. In this community every individual is subjected to a certain higher, collective unity. 

Therefore, the Chinese are so attached to their families and overcome huge distances to meet the Spring Festival at home. Family is the key to a harmonious development of an individual within the society. A person by oneself does not cost anything; only as a part of a family he acquires a certain importance. Among wealthy and lonely Chinese is widely distributed a very strange for Western mind practice to “hire” family members on high days and holidays. Thus, family occupies a really important place in the lives of ordinary Chinese. 

However, the Chinese collectivism in some cases also plays a negative role. The Chinese, who live in foreign environment, also depend on it and give a lot of importance to the way people think about them. Jeremy Wang who wrote an article about his emigrant experience recalled his childhood spent in America: “I grew up in a homogenous, white neighborhood, and at a young age, I realized that I was different from the other kids on my block. […] However, as a child, I desperately tried to fit in and assimilate into modern mainstream America. When I was in elementary school, my parents were unfamiliar with American holidays and customs, but they did their best to adopt those customs because they feared that the community would ostracize our family for being different” [Wang, 2008: 184]. 

Therefore, the overseas Chinese are subjected to assimilation, although not in a direct way, but at the level of mentality. The Chinese do not fight the system, because the strict subordination to society is one of the most important parts of Chinese way of thinking. From this follows the dual nature of the overseas Chinese mentality: on the one hand, they are still attached to the precepts of their ancestors, on the other hand, their perception of the world is changing under the influence of the society, in which they live. 

The Europeans and Americans perceive the Chinese and most Asians in general as very prim, non-emotional, passive and conservative people, who pay much attention to some strange rituals. However, every emigrant by definition cannot be passive, because in any case he takes a risk by moving to a completely different and unfamiliar country, even without knowing the language of this country. 

This contradiction can be solved by examining the structure of Chinese emigration. Most of the overseas Chinese come from the Southern coastal provinces. This region has historically been the center of navigation, so the local have often been familiar with the features of foreign culture and the travel spirit has been in their blood. At the same time, this area was quite far from the metropolis, morals and manners here have always been freer and people have had an opportunity to travel without the appropriate governmental regulations [Liu, 1995]. 

The familiarization of the overseas Chinese with Chinese culture now is an integral part of the governmental policy [Larin, 2008]. The leadership of the country believes that even those Chinese who live abroad should feel a connection with their historical homeland and should be proud of the new rise of the country. 

At the same time, different groups of Chinese immigrants treat differently to their motherland. For many emigrants with the low level of education, especially for the older generation, China, first of all, is the land of their ancestors, so they are very attached to their home country. First-generation migrants, who left the country during the period of the economic reforms, retain extensive personal contacts with their relatives and friends, who still live in China. 

However, the young generation of the overseas Chinese is often not so attached to their ethnic homeland. According to experts, the number of young overseas Chinese reached 10 million. A significant proportion of them have a high level of education, many of them have degrees of prestigious foreign universities. However, a lot of young Chinese living abroad do not know Chinese language and are even not familiar with the Chinese culture. 

The Chinese leadership is very concerned about this situation, because the young generation of overseas Chinese is considered to continue the modernization of the country.  

In order to strengthen cultural ties with the overseas Chinese different governmental organization publish a lot of academic books about Chinese language, culture and history. All these books are specially designed for young emigrants [Zhang, 2010]. Also there are three special educational centers in China opened for young overseas Chinese: Jinan University in Guangzhou, Huaqiao University and Beijing University of Chinese Language and Culture. All these universities are controlled by the migration services [Liu, 2005]. These universities and other public entities every year organize special educational trips for young overseas Chinese to mainland China. In 2006 more than 5000 young people took part in this program [Zhang, 2010]. For China 5000 people is not a big number. However, these young men are called to be the engine of further modernization of the country. 

On the one hand, such governmental policy increases the level of national pride among the overseas Chinese. On the other hand, some Chinese experts criticized this policy, arguing that thus many emigrants from China find themselves in the “cultural vacuum” [Hong, Wu, 2002] in the country of residence. They maintain that the assimilation process is slowed down because of the permanent obtrusion of the Chinese way of life and tradition values. Moreover, many Chinese that live abroad have already received the foreign citizenship, so this strategy of the Chinese leadership can be interpreted as interference in the internal affairs of other countries. 

For example, in the United States, where the idea of ethnic development known as “melting pot” is actively promoted, stereotype that all people from China are “perpetual foreigners” is still very strong [Goranda, 1999]. In other words, it is assumed that overseas Chinese are not able to adapt to a new environment, regardless of that how long they have stayed in another country. One of the Chinese emigrants argued: “unlike African and Native Americans, the Chinese challenged the superiority of white culture” [Wang, 2008]. So it is quite predictable that the overseas Chinese immigrants retain their cultural identity for a really long time. In this regard, the influence of the Chinese government on emigrants should be very careful. Otherwise, the overseas Chinese, especially those who has foreign citizenship, can be jeopardized. 

Another important feature of Chinese emigrants, which is reflected in the stereotypes about Chinese people, is constitutional bias towards labor. Jeremy Wang in his article wrote about one incident which happened with him at school: “after receiving our report cards in the tenth grade, a close friend who was frustrated with his grades said to me, “[…] Chinese people are smart and do well at school, but they will never become successful because they cannot carry on coherent conversation”. […] He did not see the value in studying as diligently as the Chinese students” [Ibid: 187]. So it is believed that overseas Chinese are even not averse to the most tedious and difficult work which is considered to be a real punishment for a Western man. Here we should take into account the differences between Western and Eastern mentalities. Western way of thinking is focused primarily on “science”: the main aim of any work is to increase the standards of living and to decrease the quantity of the so-called “extra work’ which is often hard and boring. Therefore, the fact that science and technology have not received a large development in Imperial China is real surprise for Western mind. Although such fundamental inventions as magnet, gunpowder, paper, etc. belong exactly to Chinese civilization, the Chinese as many other Asian nations are guided by one principled reason: it is necessary to love life as it is, but not to turn it into a tool of achieving something [Suzuki, 1990]. 

As a good illustration we can take the parable, which was probably written down by one of the most famous Chinese philosophers Zhuang Zi [Ibid]. The farmer used the water from the spring to irrigate his field. A passer-by asked him why he did not want to build a well with a sweep, because it could help him to do his work faster. The farmer replied that he did not want to rely on a sweep, because he did not want to become a slave of an invention. Such slavery, he added, could lead to idleness and laziness. 

It does not mean, of course, that Chinese people deny the achievements of scientific and technological progress and advantages of new inventions. However, the disposition toward labor and real aspiration to find harmony even in very difficult and monotonous work are inculcated in them from the childhood. Even the Chinese who live on the territory of China love comfort and want to live better. With the rising standards of living, the needs of ordinary Chinese are growing too. In 1980-s, when girls got married, they expected to receive “three big items” – a bicycle, a watch and a sewing machine. In 1990-s, they expected to receive new “three big items” – a television, a fridge and a washing machine. Now they want to have prestigious apartments, cars and so on [Liu, 2008]. However, the special attitude to work is always considered to be a special feature of ethnic Chinese.

***

The concept of mentality can be defined as the characteristic way of thinking of people that belong to certain social or ethnic group. The main features of Eastern mentality are traditionalism, respectful attitude to the past, the superiority of collective interests over individual interests, the inclination to introversion, etc. All these features characterize Chinese people, including the overseas Chinese. Under the influence of the people with a different way of thinking the mentality of the emigrants is gradually changing. Especially, it concerns youngest generation of the overseas Chinese. Now in the mentality of the overseas Chinese have gradually appeared such social patterns as a thirst for competition, the egocentrism, a sense of ownership, firmness of purpose. 

Nevertheless, the main specific features of the Eastern mentality cannot be obliterated, because of the big role that is played by a family in the lives of the ordinary Chinese people. After all, the vast majority of the social behavioral patterns are formed in the childhood, and children are most susceptible to learning process. According to the theory of cultural dimensions, developed by Dutch sociologist Geert Hofstede, the so-called “mental programs” can be traced for several generations of emigrants [Hofstede, 2001]. In this regard, overseas Chinese are considered to “freeze” at the interfaces between two worlds – Eastern world and Western world.







CHAPTER THREE

OVERSEAS CHINESE SHOLARS AND STUDENTS 

AS A NEW SOCIL ELITE GROUP





According to the definition that was stated in Chapter one, social elite is a rather small well-organized group of most educated and highest-income people that influence on the political decision-making process and can determine the life of the whole society. Due to that, the group of people that is considered to be social elite should meet following requirements: 1) high-level of education; 2) high working positions and salaries; 3) political representation; 4) social organizations as forums for discussion; 5) territorial communities as an indicator of the strong ties between members of the group.

This chapter analyzes the distinctive features of the returned overseas Chinese social group in compliance with the characteristics mentioned above.

1) High level of education

In recent years along with the economic success the level of education in China, especially higher education, has increased much. There are more than 2,000 institutes of higher education on the territory of the PRC, and about a quarter of the total number of young people at the age of 20-24 years old study there (according to the statistic data published in 2011) [China Statistical Yearbook, 2011: 741]. For comparison, in 2008 in the European Union about 28,7% of the total number of young people of the same age study in the higher education institutions, in the US the number of students is higher – about 34,7% [OECD, 2012: On-line].

However, several problems have not been solved. 

a) Shortages of financing

According to the statistic data in 2012, education financing in China makes up about 4.3% of GDP, while the same figure in developed countries exceeded 5%. For example, in 2010 the public expenditure on education in France was 5.9% of GDP, in the US – 5.4% of GDP, in Norway and Sweden – about 7% of GDP [The World Bank, 2013: On-line]. However, the main problem of education financing in China is insufficient supervision on education spending in rural areas that leads to the stagnation of education development in the countryside [Zhao, Sheng, 2008]. Along with the profit-orientation of private education institutions, tuition fees, especially outside big urban center, is much higher than the average salaries. 

b) Lack of professionals

The second problem is the acute lack of professors, lecturers and their assistants. Although every year in China more than 100 thousand of new teachers go down from universities and institutes of higher education, their teaching experience is minimal [Zhao, Sheng, 2008]. Moreover, every year about 6% of experienced teachers retire on pensions [Wang, Hou, 2007: 151]. In general, the number of teachers that have a degree is increasing; however they have low qualification, so the quality of education is not good enough. 

In 2007 the Beijing University conducted a survey that showed that one-third of all students were not interested in their future profession, and more than 50% of teachers believed that there was an acute shortage of free hands, while working load was really huge [Zhang, Guo, Qi, 2011: 36].

c) The problem of employment 

It is quite difficult for students that have graduated from the prestigious universities to find a job, while graduating students that have finished technical secondary schools and colleges can find a job easily. It can be explained by the fact that the need for working hands is much higher than for intellectuals [Zhao, Sheng, 2008]. 

d) Private education problems

The government supports both the state universities and the private universities, the so-called “minban” (people’s colleges). In the beginning of the reform policy, the society had a strong demand for higher education, but because of the insufficient public funding the state universities could not develop quickly. Private higher education institutions received their funding form tuitions, so they had more opportunities for further development. Moreover, they were much more sensitive to the need of the labor market, because “they were growing quickly side by side with the private enterprises” [Ozturgut O., 2011: 5]. 

However, private universities are not very popular now: it is too hard to control the quality of education in “minbans”, because they are not financed by the government. As the result, not many private higher education institutions can get an official permission to grant academic credentials. Along with that, the tuition fees at “minbans” are growing, so in many cases it is easier to go abroad and get guaranteed high-quality education. 

Consequently, it is important to open branches of the leading foreign universities on the territory of China. For example, currently, there are three British universities that have their representatives in China: the University of Edinburg at the Nankai University, the University of Nottingham at the Ningbo University, and the University of Liverpool at the Xinan Jiaotong University. 

Besides the problems mentioned above, the corruption, disparity between cities and villages and the lack of academic freedom are still burning issues of the Chinese education system. 

Therefore, more and more Chinese students that have suitable financial support choose to go abroad for study. Moreover, most of all they are seeking the high standard of education [See App. 2, Picture 2]. According to the Institute of International Education and the US Department of State’s Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, in 2010-2011 in American universities there were more Chinese students than from any other countries. At that time about 22% of the total number of international students (more than 157,000) was from China [Helfing, 2013: On-line]. Moreover, the most popular fields of study among Chinese students were business management and engineering that gave young scholars after graduation very good job opportunities, especially in China [Ibid]. 

The number of Chinese students that have decided to go to Europe for university education is increasing dramatically too [See App. 2, Picture 2]. For example, in 2010 the number of Chinese student in European universities was more than 120,000, and it was 6 times more than in 2010 [Wang, Li, 2012]. According to China Daily, the main reason for Chinese students to study in Europe is that almost all of the European universities do not charge special tuition fee to international students [Zhang, 2014]. Moreover, The Peace Tour Award has been set up with the support of the Europe-China Cultural and Educational Foundation in order to grant special awards to Chinese students with high academic achievements. The main aim of this award is to support promising young researchers studying on the territory of the European Union (EU) and increase cultural and educational exchanges [UNICA, 2014: On-line].

The active interest of Chinese students in prestigious foreign universities can be proved by the spreading of the offices of the Chinese Students and Scholars Associations located in such high-ranking universities as Cambridge University (UK), Berkley University (USA), Columbia University (USA), British Columbia University (Canada) and so on [CSSA, 2014: On-line]. The main aim of this organization is to solve all problems of the Chinese students and visiting scholars and build up strong ties among all students regardless their origin.

In such a way many Chinese students go to prestigious foreign universities for study, and they are supported not only by the Chinese leadership, but also by the local governments. Now more and more Chinese students have an opportunity to study abroad in high-ranking universities and receive high-quality diplomas.

2) High working positions and salaries

Governmental supporting programs aimed at attracting more and more foreign specialists promote high salaries among returnees. The statistic data shows that the annual income for a family in 2012 was about 13,000 RMB. The average family income in big urban centers was higher than in rural areas – 25,000 RMB and 11,400 correspondingly [National Bureau of Statistic, 2012: On-line]. At the same time, according to the statistics of 2011, the average annual income of the returned overseas Chinese specialists was much higher: more than a half of the returnees have an average annual income more than 120,000 RMB, while 35% of the returnees have an average annual income more than 36,000 RMB [See App. 2, Picture 3]. Moreover, about 75% of the overseas Chinese students found job within 3 months [Hao, Welch, 2011: On-line]. The most demandable occupations with good job opportunities were high-tech engineering and business management [Helfing, 2013].  

Furthermore, as the result of the state policy, 77% of the presidents of Chinese universities, 84% of the academicians of the Chinese Academy of Science, and 75% of academicians of the Chinese Academy of Engineering have studied or worked abroad [Zhao, Zhu, 2009: 37]. Local authorities also welcome overseas Chinese returnees to work for the governmental bodies. More and more provincial governments opened country lead level positions specifically for returned talents [China Daily, 2013]. Moreover, among the Chinese political establishment there have always been officials with foreign academic degrees: founding father of the Chinese Republic Sun Yat-sen and other core members of the first central government studied abroad. So this tradition is still popular among government officials, even despite the fact that it is still quite hard to get good appointment without connections with certain “influential figures, who are powerful enough to access special channels for governmental positions” [Chen, 2014: On-line]. However, according to the study conducted by the Chinese newspaper Sothern weakly, even now 31 out of 68 national leaders and 18% of heads of provincial governmental bodies have studied abroad [Ibid].  

Besides that, in 2002 was signed an agreement between the Harvard Kennedy School and the Tsinghua University’s School of Public Management [Bloomberg News, 2012]. According to this agreement Chinese high-level officials form central and local governmental bodies can spend 6 weeks on the territory of the U.S., during which they can take four-week study course at Kennedy School training management skills. In such a way the Chinese leadership tries to increase the number of officials with foreign degrees. 

The most famous returnees are, probably, Jack Ma, Robin Li and Charles Zhang, the creators of high-tech and Internet corporations in China. Jack Ma had worked in the U. S. as an interpreter, before he came back to China and started his own business. Now he is Executive Chairman of Alibaba Group, a group of Internet-based commercial portals and services. The company operates mainly on the territory of the PRC, and it has already outrun the main competitors, eBay and Amazon, in sales.  Another Chinese Internet entrepreneur Robin Li is a co-founder of the Chinese search system Baidu and one of the Chinese richest people. He studied information management at the Buffalo University and at State University of New York in the U. S. Charles Zhang, China’s Internet pioneer, is a co-founder of the Sohu.com Corporation and one of the major business investors in China. When he was only 22 years old, he received a full scholarship from the Tsinghua University, where he was studying physics, and went to the U. S. to attend graduate school at Massachusetts Institute of Technologies.  

Due to the governmental supporting programs the returned overseas Chinese now have the income much higher than their compatriot without foreign degrees. Moreover, more and more returnees work in the government and research centers and institutions. The Internet-based technologies are also in the hands of the overseas Chinese entrepreneurs. Of course, foreign degree does not guarantee quick success; the most important things are talent diligence and ambitions. However, the experience of studying or working abroad can be very useful, especially if it concerns high-tech technologies and public management, which are very demanded in China now.

3) Political representation

The overseas Chinese have been always in opposition to the Chinese leadership, as they have always supported nationalist and democratic parties rather than the communists. However, the overseas Chinese and the Chinese Diaspora in general have their own representatives on the political arena of the PRC. 

The link between the main political force of the PRC, the Communist Party, and the overseas Chinese Diaspora is realized by the Zhigongdang of China (Zhonguo Zhigongdang), one of eight legally recognized political parties in China. The Party was founded in 1925 in San-Francisco as a part of the so-called Society of Heaven and Earth (Tiandihui) – anti-Manchu organization that actively supported Sun Yan-Sen in his revolutionary efforts to overthrow the Qing dynasty [Pogorelov, 2014]. After that, the Party actively supported Chinese soldiers during the anti-Japanese war. In 1949 after the establishment of the People’s Republic of China the members of the Zhigongdang attended the First Plenary Session of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference and took part in the election of the Central People’s Government. 

Today the Party primarily consists of returned overseas Chinese and their relatives, overseas Chinese scholars and other prominent figures that have overseas ties. Zhigongdang supports the “multi-party co-operation” and political consultative system with the leading role of the CPC [Ibid]. Moreover, the Party plays an important role in many state political activities. The members of the Party often play the role of the conciliator between foreign political delegations and the leadership of the PRC. 

Furthermore, the head of the party Wan Gang in 2007 became the head of the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology and the first minister since the 1950s that was not the member of the CPC. Wan Gang has a long overseas experience, first, as a doctoral student at the Department of Mechanical Engineering in Clausthal University of Technology (Germany), and then as an expert in German Audi Corporation. He made an important contribution to the development of the Chinese Automobile Industry, and he is considered the greatest expert on automobiles in China. 

Overseas Chinese also have their representatives in other political parties officially recognized in the PRC. Even the General Secretary of the CPC Xi Jinping has a short experience of studying abroad: in 1985 he visited the US with the Chinese delegation to study American agriculture [Daily Mail, 2012]. The vice chair-woman of the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress and the leader of another officially recognized political party “China Association for Promotion Democracy” Yan Junqi obtained the doctorate degree in the department of naval engineering at Technical University of Denmark [China Vitae, 2014: On-line]. The leader of the Chinese Workers’ and Peasants’ Democratic Party, another legal political party, Chen Zhu also obtained his doctoral degree in foreign university, namely in Diderot University of Paris [Ibid].

The most impressive experience of studying abroad, probably, has the present Minister of Commerce Gao Hucheng. In 1975 he went abroad for study at the National University of Zaire in Kinshasa, the capital city of Zair (nowadays, the Democratic Republic of Congo). After that he received the doctoral degree in sociology from the Diderot University of Paris [Ibid]. 

In order to strengthen cooperation between foreign countries and China, more and more overseas Chinese returnees take part in local political life. Nevertheless, it is important not to overestimate the role of the overseas Chinese in China’s policies. However, now China has an urgent need for advanced innovation, but the development of new technologies could take decades. The access to necessary high-tech projects can be provided by the overseas Chinese scholars that like Wan Gang have experience of working and studying abroad. Thus, the overseas Chinese returnees that maintain strong cultural and family ties with China are valuable assets for economic development. Local government on all level support actively returnees’ participation in the development is such high-tech industries as IT, new sources of energy, media and communication. Moreover, both sides will benefit from such cooperation, as far as the overseas Chinese Diaspora has already invested much into China’s industry.  

4) Social organizations

The different associations of the overseas Chinese are not only organizations of the compatriots that need support while they are living abroad, but also discussion forums, where the important strategic decisions can be made by the strong overseas Chinese Diaspora as the independent force in the international arena.  

The most influential overseas Chinese organization, which headquarter is located on the territory of the PRC, is All-China Federation of Returned Overseas Chinese (ACFROC). First, it was a united group of overseas Chinese that decided to come back to China to support the liberation movement during the Sino-Japanese war (1937-1945). The Yan’an Overseas Chinese National Salvation Association (since 1946, the Yan-an Overseas Chinese Federation) was formed in 1940 in order to present the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) in Southeast Asia and explain Chinese living there the positive role that was played by the communists in fighting Japan [China Dictionary, 2014: On-line]. 

On the base of the Yan-an Overseas Chinese Federation a new overseas Chinese organization was established during the Civil War (1946-1950) – the Liberated Regions Returned Overseas Chinese Federation. The CCP demonstrated in strong interest in overseas Chinese at that time, but it would not start the development of any policy toward overseas Diaspora until 1949 [Ibid].

The ACFROC was founded in 1956 with the support of the Central People’s government and the Overseas Chinese Affairs Committee. The main aims of this organizations are: 1) to protect the rights and interests of returned overseas Chinese, their relatives, and all other Chinese living outside the country: 2) to united all returnees and encourage them to take part in the further development of China; 3) to strengthen the cooperation with the overseas Chinese Diaspora and support political and economic exchanges between China and their residing countries. Moreover, the ACFROC can participate in the main political and economic events and play a role of consultative body in the process of political decisions making. 

The main representative and deliberative body of the ACFROC and other overseas Chinese organizations is the National Congress of Returned Overseas Chinese. The participation of the country’s leaders, such as President Xi Jinping, Premier Li Keqiang and other representatives from the main government organs, in the opening ceremony of the Ninth National Congress that was held in December 2013 in Beijing showed that Chinese leadership pays high tribute to the services overseas Chinese rendered to the country [China Daily, 2013]. The mail aims of the congress is to review the work of the ACFROC over the past years, elect a new term of leadership and award those, who have made the great contribution to the modernization of the country. The congress is usually held every five years since the establishment of the ACFROC in 1956. 

Moreover, there are two main organizations under the governmental bodies that promote ties between overseas Chinese and their compatriots. In 1992 the China Overseas Exchange Association (COEA) was opened within the Overseas Chinese Affairs Office (affiliated to the State Council), and in 1997 the China Overseas Friendship Association (COFA) was founded under the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference) in order to strengthen cooperation with overseas Chinese and promote “the unity of the sons and daughters of China” [Thuno, 2011].

In many big foreign university and institutions of higher education are located the branches of the Chinese Students and Scholars Association (CSSA) that is the official organization for overseas Chinese students, who are studying or working in other countries. The CSSA is not only responsible for helping and supporting Chinese students abroad, but also for enhancing the political and cultural exchanges between China and foreign countries, where students are living. 

Actually, there are many non-profit and non-political overseas Chinese organizations that unite professionals and experts of certain field of study, for example, the Overseas Chinese Environmental Engineers and Scientists Association (OCEESA), the Overseas Chinese Physics Association (OCPA), the Overseas Chinese Entomologists Association (OCEA), etc. 

Among them, the Overseas Chinese Association for Institutional Research (OCAIR) established in 1996 is of interest, as far as this group of intellectuals intends to provide a forum for its members to “freely exchange ideas and information, and to share professional experience” [OCAIR, 2014: On-line]. Moreover, this group, except the annual AIR Forums, exists primarily on the Internet, and thus unites overseas Chinese scholars living all over the world. Members of the AIR reside in such countries as the U.S., Canada, Germany, the U.K., and others. In 2013 another overseas Chinese organization was formed, namely The Young Overseas Chinese Association (YOCA) in order to address the needs of young Chinese professionals. YOCA is positioned as the “first organization handcrafted by young Chinese professionals in Chicago for young Chinese professionals”, and the majority of the members of organization hold post-graduate degrees from the high-ranking U.S. universities [YOCA, 2014: On-line]. 

Globalization and development of the Internet have made the emergence of such organizations possible. Such groups are created in order to unite and support overseas Chinese residing in many countries all over the world, and to provide a free forum, where experts and scholars can share new ideas and professional experience. Members of these groups could support and advance each other, unite and promote certain ideas. As far as these organizations are formed especially for overseas Chinese, the members of these groups can feel free communicating with the compatriots. 

5) Territorial communities

More and more overseas Chinese students that have decided to return to the motherland prefer to live and work together and what is more Chinese government on all levels tries to assist their intentions. The best example of the governmental support is, perhaps, the so-called Wuxi New District or Wuxi New Area. 

The New District was founded in 1992 first as an industrial zone with the aim to attract the biggest foreign companies. It is located in the most industrialized Chinese region in the suburban of Wuxi city, approximately 120 km west of Shanghai. In the end 2009 more than 1500 enterprises have been registered in the New District [WND, 2014: On-line], and almost all of them are established by foreigners, including overseas Chinese entrepreneurs. Now the New District is one of the biggest industrial parks in China, specialized in precision machinery and electronics that considers highly attractive in today’s economic environment. 

Moreover, many overseas Chinese are finding Wuxi with its friendly policies to be an appealing option to establish new enterprises. For their needs in August 1998 the Wuxi Pioneer Park was established, and became the first national-level park for returning overseas students in China. In 2013 the Third China Overseas High-Tech Talents and Projects Promotion Fair was held in Wuxi with the assistance of Chinese Association for Science and Technology and the Chinese Ministry of Education, and it was aiming to “accelerate the pace of attracting more and more high-end talents, including overseas Chinese scholars, specialists, and engineers, to start their business in Wuxi and expand Wuxi economy” [The Third China (Wuxi) Promotion Fair, 2013: On-line]. 

Besides Wuxi, many local governments have also established the so-called Returning Student Venture Parks or Overseas Students Parks that are located in high-tech development areas. These zones are established exclusively for companies that were founded by overseas Chinese returnees. In the Overseas Students Parks returnees can find whatever they need – not only low rent and tax benefits offering by almost all science parks in China, but also special features that addressed the needs of returnees, such as accommodation and bilingual schools for their children. 

The first Science and Technology Park for overseas Chinese students was created in 1994 in Nanjing district [Barabantseva, 2005]. Since then several tens of such parks have been established all over the territory of the PRC, including the Overseas Students Science Park in Zhongguancun, the oldest of the three students’ parks located in Beijing [China Daily, 2011: On-line]. According to the statistic data presented by the Chinese Ministry of Personnel, in 2004 there were 110 Overseas Students Parks, and now the number of industrial parks of this kind is more than 160 with about 8,000 business that provide working positions for returning students [Walcott, 2003: 213]. 

These parks consolidated local research institutes, and in such a way were created financial and scientific platforms to support the start-ups of the returnees. Thus, the Park provided a great opportunity for overseas Chinese students to realize their business goals on the territory of China and in such a way make a contribution for national economic development.

Furthermore, the local governments launch talent programs to offer preferential policies to students, who have decided to come back to the motherland. For example, in 2011 the financial support of 1 to 3 million RMB is provided for high-tech enterprises established by overseas Chinese students in Taizhou, Jiangsu province [Zhao, Zhu, 2009: 37]. At the same time, in Shenzhen, the major city of Guangdong Province, the subsidies for prospective entrepreneurs with the overseas experience were increased to 300,000 RMB [Ibid: 38]. 

In the same year the “One Hundred Most Growth Start-Ups Contest” started, and from that time it is held every year among enterprises that are founded by returnees in the Venture Parks [Ibid]. The main aim of this contest is to help the most promising companies to become “bigger and stronger as soon as possible”, and support further cooperation between entrepreneurs and investment institutions. 

In such a way Chinese government tries to improve the business environment for overseas Chinese returnees and make for them the special place on the domestic market. In future, the leadership of China that desires to boost the development of high-tech industries will create more and more opportunities for overseas Chinese entrepreneurs.

***

The returned overseas Chinese scholars and students can be called social elite group as they really meet the requirements that were stated above.

First, their level of education in many cases is higher than the level of education of their colleagues at home. The Chinese leadership has just begun to reform the education system in the country, and despite the success in this sphere, which has been achieved in last years, the level of education, especially higher education, in China is still lower than in developed Western countries. Plus, the returned overseas Chinese have unique experience of living abroad that can help them to orient better in contemporary fast-paced world. Some of them, like, for example, Jack Ma, the founder of Alibaba Group, have worked abroad and seen completely new technologies and innovations that they have tried to repeat at the motherland. 

Second, due to the governmental supporting programs the returned overseas Chinese now have the income much higher than their compatriot without foreign degrees. More and more returnees work at universities and advanced research centers. Moreover, local authorities welcome overseas Chinese returnees to work for the governmental bodies. The Internet-based technologies are also in the hands of the overseas Chinese entrepreneurs. High salaries and high social positions let returnees to stand out against a background of their colleagues

Third, the returnees form a very well-organized group that has its own political representation bodies – Zhigongdang Party and other various social organizations, members of which can freely share their experience and new knowledge and support each other. Besides that, many returnees form solidary communities, living together in the so-called Overseas Chinese Students Parks, where they have all possible opportunities for the development of their start-ups and necessary facilities. 

































CONCLUSION





The international community for the last three decades has been really impressed by the rapid growth of the Chinese economy. However, China has not yet reached the level of development of Western countries, especially in the sphere of social welfare. Moreover, education system and medical services still remain on a low level. As the result, despite the increasing economic power of the PRC and gradually rising living standards, the waves of emigrants from the country does not decrease, but rather increases. Most of the immigrants are wealthy people, graduate specialists and cultural workers. 

Since the beginning of economic reforms Chinese leadership has made several attempts to encourage Chinese students to go abroad for study. The Ministry of Education with the support of the Ministry of the Foreign Affairs concluded several agreements concerning educational exchanges with the U.S., Great Britain, France, Germany, Japan, and many other countries. Central and local authorities designed the number of different research grants and scholarships awarded to students with the best academic achievements. The Chinese government provided students studied abroad guaranteed employment with adequate salaries. Furthermore, to stimulate students to go abroad for their own expense, self-funded students were granted equal rights with state-funded students. 

Due to these measures, the number of students went abroad for study increased much. However, at the same time the Chinese leadership met with another obstacle: not all of the young people studying or working abroad decided to come back to the motherland. So in the 1990s the Chinese government had an acute question how to attract most talented overseas Chinese scholars and scientists to China. 

For that an active propaganda work among Chinese students abroad were held:  special journals, newspapers and electronic editions were created to provide overseas students with the latest information about the economic and political achievements of the Chinese government, more and more delegations were sent abroad to strengthen ties with the overseas Diaspora, and so on. The leadership of the country was interested much in overseas Chinese with working experience to come back to China and run high-tech enterprises. To achieve this goal, special industrial zones were established to attract returned overseas Chinese and provide them with all necessary facilities for living and for business. The Chinese scholars and specialists that returned to China were provided with working positions and high salaries. More and more new organizations supported overseas Chinese were established all over the country for various groups of returnees. 

However, not many overseas Chinese were inspired by these programs and came back to China. Although in the 2000s the Chinese government continued to develop different stimulating programs aimed at attracting overseas Chinese back to the motherland, however finally the Chinese authorities decided to use the experience and skills of overseas Chinese without returning them to the country.

New programs of the short-term visits and participation in expert commissions were established, and the new simplified visa system was designed specifically for overseas talents. It was a completely new approach in the development of the policy toward the human resources of the Diaspora. The overseas Chinese scholars received an opportunity to hold their positions in foreign universities and research centers, but at the same time they could take part in further development of the country.  Moreover, they have everything required for that. 

The level of education of the returned overseas Chinese in many cases is higher than the level of education of their colleagues at home. The Chinese leadership has just begun to reform the education system in the country, and despite the success in this sphere, which has been achieved in the last years, the level of education, especially higher education, in China is still lower than in developed Western countries. Plus, the returned overseas Chinese have unique experience of living abroad that can help them to orient better in contemporary fast-paced world. Some of them, like, for example, Jack Ma, the founder of Alibaba Group, have worked abroad and seen completely new technologies and innovations that they have tried to repeat at the motherland. 

Moreover, due to the governmental supporting programs the returned overseas Chinese now have the income much higher than their compatriot without foreign degrees. More and more returnees work at universities and advanced research centers. Moreover, local authorities welcome overseas Chinese returnees to work for the governmental bodies. The Internet-based technologies are also in the hands of the overseas Chinese entrepreneurs. High salaries and high social positions let returnees to stand out against a background of their colleagues

Finally, the returnees form a very well-organized group that has its own political representation bodies – Zhigongdang Party and other various social organizations, members of which can freely share their experience and new knowledge and support each other. Besides that, many returnees form solidary communities, living together in the so-called Overseas Chinese Students Parks, where they have all possible opportunities for the development of their start-ups and necessary facilities. 

In other words, now the returned overseas Chinese scholars and students form a social elite group. Even despite the fact that some of them have foreign citizenship, they make a great contribution to the development of the country. In contrast to foreign specialists that are working in China, returned overseas Chinese know many distinctive features of Chinese culture (traditionalism, respectful attitude to the past, the superiority of collective interests over individual interests, etc.) and can better adapt to the Chinese realities. However, under the influence of the people with a different way of thinking the mentality of the overseas Chinese has changed. Now the overseas Chinese can be characterized by such social patterns as a thirst for competition, the egocentrism, a sense of ownership, firmness of purpose. Namely these features of Western mentality can, finally, let returned overseas Chinese to find new ways for further development of both – Chinese economy and culture.

There are still many issues that still demand solution. Perhaps, now the Chinese leadership needs to focus all the attention on the already-returned talents, rather than to attract more and more overseas Chinese specialists into the country. Especially, when there is no adequate assurance that returnees have supportive working environment. However, even taking all these factors into account, China’s last initiatives accepted by the central government and local authorities are likely to be successful.





































BIBLIOGRAPHY: 

Primary Sources: 

List of legislations in chronological order:

1) Provisional Regulations on the Affairs of Chinese Students Studying Abroad, 1979 (PRC) (Chuguo Liuxue Renyuan Guanli Jiaoyu Gongzuode Zanxing Guiding), promulgated by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology Comission and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1979

Available at: http://liuxue.eol.cn/html/lx/xsdhg.shtml (15/03/2014) (Chinese)

2) Instruction for Student that Go Abroad for Study at their own Expense, 1981 (PRC) (Guanyu Zifei Chuguo Liuxuede Qingshi), promulgated by the State Council in January 1981

Available at: http://www.360doc.com/content/13/0913/20/11503926314258134. shtml (22/03/2014) (Chinese)

3) Interim Regulations for Students that Go Abroad for Study at their own Expense, 1981 (PRC) (Guanyu Zifei Chuguo Liuxuede Zanxing Guiding), promulgated by the State Council in January 1981

Available at: http://www.360doc.com/content/13/0913/20/11503926314258134. shtml (07/03/2014) (Chinese)

4) Report on the Management of the Overseas Chinese Students Affairs, 1981 (PRC) (Guanyu Chuguo Liuxue Renyuan Guanli Gongzuo Qingkuangde Baogao), promulgated by the State Council in January 1981

Available at: http://www.360doc.com/content/13/0913/20/11503926314258134. shtml (11/04/2014)  (Chinese)

5) Interim Provisions of the State Council of the PRC about Self-funded Students Studying Abroad, 1984 (PRC) (Guowuyuan Guanyu Zifei Chuguo Liuxuede Zanxing Guiding), promulgated by the State Council in December 1984

Available at: http://www.gqb.gov.cn/node2/node3/node5/node9/node106/userobje

ct7ai1352.html (17/02/2014) (Chinese)

6) Law of the People's Republic of China on Control of the Entry and Exit of Aliens, 1985 (PRC) (Waiguoren Rujing Chujing Guanli Fa), promulgated by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress in November 1985

Available at: http://baike.baidu.com/view/277090.htm (11/03/2014) (Chinese)

7) Several Provision Regulations of the State Education Comission for Personnel Working Abroad, 1986 (PRC) (Guojia Jiaoyu Weiyuanhui Guanyu Chuguo Liuxue Renyuan Gongzuode Ruogan Zanxing Guiding), promulgated by the State Council in December 1986

Available at: http://news.xinhuanet.com/overseas/2005-12/08/_content_38945 58.htm (15/03/2014)  (Chinese) 

8) Notice on Issues Related to Students Studying Abroad, 1992 (PRC) (Guanyu Zai Wailiuxue Renyuan Youguan Wentide Tongzhi), promulgated by the State Council in August 1992 

Available at: http://www.china.com.cn/chinese/zhuanti/254669.htm (15/03/2014)  (Chinese)

9) Reformed approach to the selection of the students studying abroad at public expense, 1995 (PRC) (Gaige Guojia Gongfei Chuguo Liuxue Xuanba Guanli Banfade Fangan), promulgated by the Ministry of Education in February 1995

Available at: http://union.china.com.cn/gaige/txt/2008-03/04/content_2093743.htm (15/03/2014) (Chinese)

10) Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of the Rights and Interests of the Returned Overseas Chinese and the Relatives of Overseas Chinese Who Remain in the Homeland, 2001 (PRC) (Zhonghua Renmin Gong He Guo Guiqiao Qiaojuan Quanyi), promulgated by the National People’s Congress in October 2000

Available at: http://qwb.sh.gov.cn/shqb/english/laws/userobject1ai1252.html (11/03/2014) (English)

11) Solutions to Encouraging Chinese Students to Serve the Motherland in Various Ways, 2001 (PRC) (Guanyu Guli Haiwai Liuxue Renyuan Yiduozhong Xingshi Weiguo Fuwude Ruogan Yijian), promulgated by the Ministry of Personnel, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Science and Technology, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Security in May 2001

Available at: http://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2002/content_61391.htm (11/03/2014) (Chinese)

12) Circular of the General Office of the State Council Concerning Matters Relating to Students Studying Abroad, 2010 (PRC) (Guowuyuan Bangongting Guanyu Zaiwai Liuxue Renyuan Youguan Wentide Tongzhi), prohibited by the State Council in May 2010

Available at: http://www.chinalawedu.com/new/23223a23228a2010/20101214 shangf134850.shtml (11/04/2014) (English)

13) Law of the People's Republic of China on Control of the Entry and Exit of Aliens, 2012 (PRC) (Rujing Chujing Guanli Fa), promulgated by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress in June 2012

Available at: http://www.npc.gov.cn/npc/xinwen/2012007/01/content1728516.htm (11/04/2014)  (Chinese)

14) National Project to Provide Support to the Post-Graduate Student, 2013 (PRC) (2013 Nian Guojia Jianshi Gaoshuiping Daxue Gongpai Yanjiusheng Xiangmu Lianhe Peiyang Boshi Yanjiusheng Xuanpai Banfa), promulgated by the China Scholarship Council in November 2012

Statistic data:

1) Development and Planning Division of Education Department. Educational Statistics Yearbook of China, 1998. Beijing: People’s Education Press (Chinese)   

2) National Bureau of Statistics of China. China Social Statistical Yearbook, 2006. Beijing: Chinese Statistics Press (Chinese)

3) National Bureau of Statistics of China. China Statistical Yearbook, 2011. Beijing: Chinese Statistics Press (Chinese)

4) National Bureau of Statistics of China. Communique on Major figures of the 2010. Population Census, 2010. (English)

5) National Bureau of Statistics of China. Statistical Communiqué of the People's Republic of China on the 2012 National Economic and Social Development, 2012. 

Available at: http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/StatisticalCommuniqu/201302/t 20130222_61456.html (11/05/2014) (English)

6) Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Education at a Glance, 2012. 

Available at: http://www.oecd.org/edu/highlights.pdf (11/05/2014) (English)

7) Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). International Migration Database, 2013.

Available at:  http://stats.oecd.org (20/04/2013) (English)

8) The World Bank. Public Spending on Education (% of GDP), 2013.

 Available at: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.XPD.TOTL.GD.ZS (11/05/2014) (English)

Other sources:

1) China Scholars Abroad, 1978-2003 Chuguo Liuxue Gongzuo Dashiji [The Chronicles of Working and Studying Abroad, 1978-2003]

Available at: http://2003.chisa.edu.cn/newchisa/web/0/2003-06-20/news_2276.asp (11/05/2014) (Chinese)

2) China Vitae On-line.

Available at: http://www.chinavitae.com/aboutus.php (11/05/2014) (English)

3) Chinese Government’s Official Web Portal, The Overseas Chinese Affairs Office of the State Council.

Available at: http://english.gov.cn/2005-10/03/content_74290.htm (11/05/2014) (English)

4) Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in the United States of America, New Types of Visas.

Available at: http://www.china-embassy.org/eng/visas/ (11/05/2014) (English)

5) International Services for Human Rights, “The Ratification Status of the Main Human Rights Treaties”. 

Available at: http://ww.ishr.ch/About%20UN/Ratification/Ratification%20-%20Human%20Rights%20treaties.htm (11/05/2014) (English)

6) Ministry of Education, “Shenzhou Xueren” Zazhi Ji Dianziban [“Chinese students” Journal and Its Electronic Edition] 

Available at: http://www.moe.edu.cn/publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/moe/moe_396/ 200411/4586.html (11/05/2014) (English)

7) Network of Universities from the Capitals of Europe (UNICA), Peace Tour Award for Outstanding Chinese Students in Europe.

Available at: http://www.unica-network.eu/news/peace-tour-award-for-outstanding-chinese-students-in-europe-application-deadline-18th-april (11/05/2014) (English)

8) Overseas Chinese Association for Institutional Research, Official Web-Site.

Available at: http://www.ocair.org/default.aspx (11/05/2014) (English)

9) Report from U. S. Embassy, Science and Education for a Prosperous China: Lessons from Abroad. 

Available at: http://www.fas.org/nuke/guide/china/doctrine/stabrd4.htm#TOP (11/05/2014) (English)

10) The Third China (Wuxi) Overseas High-Tech Talents and Projects Promotion Fair, Official Web-site.

Available at: http://2013hz.tlpsr.com/en/index.asp (11/05/2014) (English)

11) University of Chinese Academy of Science, “Thousand Talents Program”.

Available at: http://english.ucas.ac.cn/JoinUs/Pages/default.aspx (11/05/2014) (English)

12) Wuxi New District (WND), Official Web-site.

Available at: http://en.wnd.gov.cn/www/NDintro/index.html (11/05/2014) (English)

13) Young Overseas Chinse Association, Official Web-Site.

Available at: http://www.yocausa.org/ (11/05/2014) (English)

14) Zhang X. Zhongguode Fazhan Yu Zhongguo Liuxue Renyuande Shimin [Development of China and the Mission of the Overseas Chinese Students], the speech of the Minister of Personnel Zhang Xuexhang on the conference “Chinese and International Talents’ Competition in the 21st Century”.

Available at: http://www.chinatalents.gov.cn/ywydt/index49.htm (11/05/2014) (Chinese)

15) Zhongguo Zhigongdang, “Woguo Liuxuesheng Zhengce Shi Ruhe Zhubu Zouxiang Chengshude” [Policy toward Overseas Chinese Students: The Graduate Wey to Prosperity]

Available at: http://www.chinazhigongparty.org.cn/zhcfg/lxsh/200911/t200911 27_1881.html (11/05/2014) (Chinese)

Secondary Sources: 

1) 90% of overseas students wish to return for work // China’s Youth Daily. – 2004. – December  (English)

1) Chen, J. Nation aims to increase talent pool / Chen Jia // China Daily. – 2010. – 07 June (English)

2) Chen M. China’s returning overseas students shun government work / Man-nung Chen // Want China Times. – 2014. – 21 April (English)

3) Chew J., Debowski S. Developing an Effective Repatriation Strategy for MNC: A Model and Tools for International Human Resource Management / Janet Chew, Shelda Debowski // Journal of Comparative International Management. – 2008, Vol. 11, No. 2. – p. 3-21 (English)

4) China Creates New Visa Category to Attract Overseas Talents // People’s Daily. – 2012. – 09 July (English)

5) China’s Vice-President Revisits Youth with a Trip to the Midwest to Meet Farming Family He Stayed with on Exchange Trip // Daily Mail. – 2012. – 15 February (English)

6) Barabantseva E. The Party-State’s Transnational Outreach: Overseas Chinese Policies of the PRC’s Central Government / Elena Balabantseva // Greater China Occasional Papers. – Tuebingen, 2005 (English)

7) Easton D. The Development of Political Science: A Comparative Survey. – New York, 1991 (English)

8) Foldesi T. The Right to Move and Its Achilles’ Heel, The Right to Asylym / Tamas Foldesi // Connecticut Journal of International Law. – 1993. – No. 8. – L. 289 (English)

9) Gotanda N. Exclusion and Inclusion: Immigration and American Orientalism // Across the Pacific. Asian Americans and Globalization. / Ed. by Hu-Dehart E. – Philadelphia, 1999 (English)

10) Hao J., Welch A. The Job-Seeking Experience of Hai Gui (High-Skilled Returnees) in China. – Vienna, 2011. 

Available at: http://www.dehems-project.eu/static/uploaded/files/ (15/03/2013) (English) 

11) Helfing K. Chinese Students Boost U.S. Universities to all Time High Foreign Enrollment / Kimberly Helfing // Associated Press. – 2013. – 11 November. 

Available at: http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/2013/11/chinese-students-boost-us-universities-to-all-time-high-foreign-enrollment.html (03/11/2013) (English)

12) Herskovits M. H. The Significance of the Study of Acculturation for Anthropology / Melville J. Herskovits // American Anthropologist. – 1937. – №2. – p. 259-264 (English)

13) Harvard-Trained Communists Vie for Power as Party Gathers // Bloomberg News. – 2102. – 09 November (English)

14) Hong Y., Wu W. Kuangda Huaren Yanjiude Shiye [To expand the scope of study of the overseas Chinese] – Collected articles about the study of the overseas Chinese. – 2002. – p. 85-90 (Chinese)

15) Hofstede G. Culture’s consequences: comparing values, behaviors, institutions, and organizations across nations. – Thousand Oaks, 2001 (English)

16) James D. C. S. Coping with a new society: the unique psychological problems of immigrants youth // The Journal of School Health. – 1997. – No. 67. – p. 98-102 (English)

17) Larin A. G. Kitay i zarubezhnyye kitaytsy [China and the overseas Chinese] – Moscow, 2008 (Russian)

18) Li H. Higher Education in China: Complement or Competition to U.S. Universities / Haizheng Li // American Universities in a Global Market. – October  2010. – p. 269-304 (English)

18) Liu G. The Right to Leave and Return and Chinese Migration Law. – Sydney, 2002 (English)

19) Liu G. O vneshney politike Kitaya i rossiysko-kitayskikh otnosheniyakh [About Chinese foreign Policy and Russian-Chinese Relations] – St. Petersburg. – 2008 (Russian)

20) Liu L. H. Translingual practice: literature, national culture, and translated modernity. – Stanford, 1995 (English)

21) Maljavin V. Kitay upravlyayemyy. Staryy dobryy menedzhment [China managed. Good old management] – Moscow, 2007 (Russian)

22) Ozturgut O. Quality Assurance in Private Higher Education in China / Omar Ozturgut // Current Issues in Education. – 2011. – Vol. 14, No. 3. – p. 1-10 (English)

23) Overseas Students to Work in Government // China Daily. – 2003. – 28 December (English)

24) Pogorelov R. Overseas Chinese and Their Role in China’s Policies / Roman Pogorelov // New Eastern Outlook. – 2014. – 27 March (English)

25) Returned Overseas Chinese Hold Congress // China Daily. – 2013. – 15 December (English)

26) Sam D. F. Psychological adaptation of adolescents with immigrant backgrounds / David Lackland Sam // Journal of Social Psychology. – 2000. – № 140. – p. 5-25 (English)  

27) Simon F. D., Cao C. China’s Emerging Technological Edge: Assessing the Role of High-End Talent. – Cambridge, 2009 (English)

28) Suzuki D. Lektsii po Dzen-buddizmu  [Lectures on Zen Buddism] – Moscow, 1990 (Russian)

29) Thuno M. Reaching Out and Incorporating Chinese Overseas: The Trans-territorial Scope of the PRC by the End of the 20th Century / Mette Thuno // The China Quarterly. – December 2001. – p. 910-929 (English)

30) Timofeeva I. Mozgi, kotorye my poteryali [Brains that we have lost] / Irina Timofeeva // Novaya Gazeta. – 2009. – October, No. 121 

Available at: http://www.novayagazeta.ru/society/42853.html (11/05/2014) (Russian)

31) Vasantkumar C. What is this “Chinese” in overseas Chinese? / Chris Vasantkumar // The Journal of Asian Studies. – 2012. – Vol. 1, No. 72. – p. 423-446 (English)

32) Walcott S. M. Chinese Science and Technology Industrial Parks. – Ashgate, 2003 (English)

33) Wang G., Zheng Y. China: Development and Governance. – Singapore, 2012 (English)

34) Wang H. Haigui Shidai [The Era of Returnees]. – Beijing, 2005 (Chinese) 

35) Wang J. Stereotypes and Assimilation: The Story of a Chinese American / Jeremy Wang // The Crit. – 2008,  №1(2) – p. 183-190 (English)

36) Wang X., Hou S. Woguo Dazhonghua Gaodeng Jiaoyude Fazhan: Wenti Yu Duice [On the Development of Mas Higher Education in China: Problems and Suggestions] / Journal of Renmin University of China. – 2007. – No. 6. – p. 148-153 (Chinese)

37) Wang Z., Li X. Weak Euro Lures Students and Tourists West / Zhuoqiong Wang, Xiang Li // Chian Daily. – 2012. – 11 June (English) 

38) Wei Y., Sun Z. China: Building an Innovation Talent Program System and Facing Global Competition In a Knowledge Economy / Yu Wei, Zhaojun Sun // Brain Circulation. – 2012. – Vol. 1.

Available at: http://academicexecutives.elsevier.com/articles/ (12/11/2013)  (English)

39) Dunn W. N. Public Policy Analysis: An Introduction. – New York, 1994 (English)

41) Yeh C. J. Age, acculturation, cultural adjustment, and mental health symptoms of Chinese, Korean, and Japanese immigrant youths / Christine J. Yeh // Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology. – 2003. – Vol. 1, No. 9. – p. 34-48 (English)

42) Zhang X., Guo S., Qi P. Gaodeng Jiaoyu Dazhonghuade Gongzi Yingxiang Yanjiu [The Effect of Popularization of Higher education on Labor Wage] / Xiaobei Zhang, Sumei Guo, Peng Qi // South China Population. – 2011. – vol. 26, No. 6. – p. 34-41 (Chinese)

43) Zhang Y. European Universities Growing In Popularity Among Students / Zhang Yue // China Daily. – 2014. – 17 March (English)

44) Zhang Y. Overseas Chinese and a Rising China: the limits of a diplomatic “Diaspora Option”. – London, 2010 (English)

45) Zhao L., Sheng S. Fast and Furious: Problems of China’s Higher Education Expansion / Litao Zhao, Sixin Sheng // EAI Background Brief. – 2008. – No. 395 Available at:  http://www.eai.nus.edu.sg/BB395.pdf  (11/03/2014) (English)

46) Zhao L., Zhu J. China’s Talent Schemes: Initiatives form Central to Local Governments / Litao Zhao, JinJing Zhu // East Asian Policy. – 2009. – No. 11. – p. 34-41 (English)



































APPENDIX 1: statistic data on students going abroad and returning to china   

Picture 1. Chinese students abroad, 1978-1999 (Source: Educational Statistics Yearbook of China, 1998)



Picture 2. Chinese students abroad, 2000-2011 (Source: Wei, Sun, 2012)







appendix 2: reasons and destinations for studying abroad in china   

Picture 1. The most popular countries among Chinese students, 2012 (Source: Nanjing Marketing Group, 2012)



Picture 2. Reasons of choosing foreign education, 2012 (Source: Nanjing Marketing Group, 2012)







Picture 3. Annual income of returned overseas Chinese, 2010 (RMB) (Source: Hao, Welch, 2012)

