Russian Federation Government

Federal State Autonomous Educational Institution of Higher Professional Education

National Research University

HIGHER SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS

Faculty: World Economy and International affairs

Department: International affairs





MASTER’S THESIS

“The perspectives of the EU common foreign policy: the case of Iranian nuclear programme”





Student: Maria Nikonorova

Scientific adviser: Prof. Natividad Fernández-Sola

Reviewer: Prof. M.V. Bratersky

















Moscow 2014

The perspectives of the EU common foreign policy: the case of Iranian nuclear programme

Summary: The EU common foreign and security policy has often been regarded as a most feeble part of the integration process, but the best way to assess its effectiveness and possible perspectives is to analyze its acting during international crises.  The case of Iranian nuclear crisis presents a perfect example, since it is both a matter of regional stability and an issue of international security, namely, nuclear non-proliferation. The research aims at analyzing the Iranian case as an example of common European action and deriving its consequences for the European Union’s common foreign and security policy. The objective is to find out, whether the EU is able to act successfully during international crises and if yes, which conditions should it meet to achieve its objectives. 



Key words: European Union, foreign policy, Iranian nuclear programme, non-proliferation, CFSP















Introduction



The European Union’s common foreign and security policy has often become a subject of research for scholars. The EU is a new formation; many say it is a sui generis formation with no precedents in world history. The EU is no international organization, no state – yet, it tries to act in a way, which has traditionally been reserved to states, namely in the sphere of international relations.  

The European common foreign and security policy has been studied quite often and mostly the discussion is about whether the EU has a potential to pursue an effective and active common foreign policy. 

The major objective of this research is to find out, using the case of Iranian nuclear crisis as an example, whether the EU may have potential for successful handling of international crises, and whether it could be spoken of a ‘European approach” to issues of international peace and security. On the one hand, Iranian case demonstrates that the EU may act quite effectively on the international arena, but it remains unclear, whether this success is due to deepened cooperation among EU Member States and enhancement of CFSP’s effectiveness or to some other reasons, and, consequently, whether it could have some lasting implications on European Union’s common foreign policy. Iranian case here is of special interest, since it comprises both regional crisis (and EU relations with one particular country) and the global security issue, namely, the nuclear non-proliferation. 

The research regards European foreign policy as intergovernmental and realist in its core, and shall be based on the neorealist paradigm of international relations. Thus, it is presumed, that European CFSP is driven by Member States, namely, by the most powerful and influential, and the development of CFSP as well as common actions by the EU are driven by Member States’ necessity to pursue their interests more effectively. 

In the research it shall be argued, that despite its intergovernmental nature, the EU common foreign policy may, in fact, be efficient and successful under certain circumstances and the EU may be regarded as an actor on the international arena. However, this happens not because of some institutional changes in the EU, but because Member States find this form more convenient for achievement of their goals. 

Thus, the research question would be: taking Iran as a case, characterize the role of the EU in the crisis management and analyze how this case reflects the main characteristics of the EU common foreign and security policy, its strengths and weaknesses. 

The research tasks shall be:

To analyze the EU handling of Iranian nuclear crisis

To analyze the EU politics on non-proliferation of WMD

To analyze the process of elaborating common positions in the EU in the sphere of the CFSP

To elaborate the notion “European approach” to handling international crises

To elaborate possible outcomes for such approach in Iranian crisis and further

To present generalized conclusions about the EU actions in crisis management

To reach the objectives of the research at first there shall be conducted an analysis of the way the EU common foreign and security policy functions, with the examples of the previous actions. Then, there will be presented an analysis of the case study in question, and finally, generalized conclusions, derived from the case study and suitable for application in other cases.  The main resources for the research are the documents, related to the EU common foreign and security policy, and official documents issued on behalf of the EU and other E3+3 negotiators during the Iranian crisis.  

The Iranian nuclear crisis has lasted more than a decade and only recently it could be spoken of a possibility of having it finally solved. The EU action during Iranian nuclear crisis has often been the object of research and it should be admitted that it had been described thoroughly, in various aspects, yet, the papers were concentrating either on sanctions as an instrument of European coercive diplomacy, or were trying to evaluate the impact of the EU to the Iranian crisis solvation, the effectiveness of the EU foreign policy towards Iran and the chances of parties coming to an agreement. Generally, the Iranian case is agreed to be a good example of the European CFSP in action, and it is often spoken of a so-called “European approach” to the crisis management, as different from approaches of other world powers, though rarely defined other than comprising diplomatic and coercive measures.  

The following paper is taking all the previous research in consideration and aims at deriving some generalized conclusions about not only the EU impact on the Iranian crisis (presuming it to be close to final resolution), but an impact of this crisis on the European Union’s common foreign and security policy, presenting the prospects this experience gives to the EU as an actor. It also tries to assess the European foreign policy from a realist positions, though the EU is usually denied the right to be considered an actor in a realist perception. Taking into account the current international situation, first and foremost, the Ukrainian crisis, which would demand of the EU some common action, the paper may add up to the debates about the EU action in crisis management, the scope of its capabilities and limitation to its common actions.

The paper consists of three chapters and is organized as follows. The first chapter is dealing with the theoretical aspects of European foreign policy, analyzing the way the EU elaborates and presents its common foreign and security policy. The second chapter represents a case study – analysis of the European handling of the Iranian nuclear crisis. The third chapter is dedicated to generalizing the actions of the EU during the Iranian crisis and driving out the perspectives for the EU actions in handling Iranian and future crises. The conclusion corresponds to the main aim of the research and speculates about the EU perspectives as an international actor according to the Iranian case. 




The theoretical aspects of the EU foreign policy



The European Union is more and more often regarded as a single actor on the international arena. It should be remembered though that common foreign and security policy, which used to constitute the so called 2nd pillar under the Maastricht treaty of 1992, is still the least integrated area of the EU architecture. It shouldn’t be forgotten, that foreign and security policy is the most specific issue of country’s sovereignty, which member states are not eager to pass on supranational level. Yet in changing and insecure environment the EU member states, even the most powerful, couldn’t still be confident in their position and possibility to play significant role in the international system. Thus, common actions may be more effective and EU speaking with a single voice may be more efficient in promoting its values and positions on international stage. This may be regarded as a good reason for European countries to cooperate more closely under the auspices of Common Foreign and Security policy. The problem is, however, that there may be disagreement over some crucial questions of international relations among the 28 EU countries, as it happened in case of Iraq, Libya or Ukraine. Yet, there are some questions when public opinion and positions of governments of Member States are the same and it is possible to elaborate and define common position. The nuclear non-proliferation as in case of the Iranian nuclear programme seems to be a good example to examine.

According to the Treaty on the European Union, the EU “shall define and pursue common policies and actions, and shall work for a higher degree of cooperation in all fields of international relations, in order to: <…>( c ) preserve peace, prevent conflicts and strengthen international security, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, with the principles of the Helsinki Final Act and with the aims of the charter of Paris, including those relating to external borders”. Thus, dealing with international crises, including those related to matters of international security is supposed to be one of the EU tasks on international arena, and the Union has enough competences for acting in the sphere, since it is stipulated by the Treaties. 

From it very beginning as European political cooperation, the sphere of common foreign policy was purely intergovernmental and there could hardly be named any attempts to bring it to complete supranational regulation. Yet, the European component has been increasing steadily, resulting in the formation of position of High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and European External Action Service.

Any discussion about European common foreign and security policy is usually preceded by the theoretical debates about what kind of international actor the EU constitutes. First and foremost, it seems appropriate to define our understanding of the actorness in the international relations. There have been many works dedicated to this issue and many scholars have given their own interpretation of the term and criteria of actorness. To sum all these notions it could be said, that being an actor of international relations means to be capable to behave actively, to elaborate and pursue interests, to act independently and to be recognized by other participants of the international systems. Mostly these criteria are applicable to states, having both interests and capabilities to be active on the international arena. Yet, the EU, though not being a state, has some characteristics, which allow applying the notion of actorness to it as well. Undoubtedly, the EU is an actor in the international system, yet the limits of its actions are determined by the individual Member States. Indeed, the EU activity in the world varies dependent on the sphere of action – which is best depicted by the saying that it’s an economic giant, a political dwarf and a military worm.  It is often said that the EU is a normative power, acting mostly through its “soft power”, trying to impose its idea of rights and freedoms on its partners, acting through norms and being guided mostly by norms, not by interests. Indeed, this concept presumes that the EU does not act as a typical world power, partly, because it simply does not have enough means for such kind of action. 

The foreign policy has traditionally remained a part of national sovereignty, since it is based on each nation’s specific interests and capabilities. No doubt, that such a complicated organism as European Union, with 28 states with quite a variety of means and goals may find it difficult indeed to elaborate any common position. As a result, among all classical theories of European integration, the intergovernmental theory seems the most applicable to the foreign policy, as it claims, that countries integrate as long as they find integration to be a suitable instrument for achieving their goals. This idea corresponds to the vision of neorealism, highlighting states as primary international actors, according to which the EU “acts as a vehicle for the collective interests of its member states’.

Thus, countries act independently most of the time and try to elaborate common positions when they find it more useful. Lately, however, we may notice, that the EU tries to come to some common position even when the positions of the nation-states are obviously quite different. Surely, “the EU is mainly active where internal consensus is easily achieved, not where external demands are most pressing”. There still exists a certain move towards the so called communitarization – of foreign policy, namely, the establishment of new offices such as EEAS and High Representative for CFSP, yet, these measures are merely technical and serve to improvement and, to some extent, complication, of the negotiation process among Member States, leaving the intergovernmental basis of the CFSP unchanged. Paradoxically, though European common foreign and security policy remains almost entirely in the hands of national governments, they tend to use the EU as a presenter of commonly agreed positions, which makes them sound more intensively on the international arena.

As a major cause for such development I would like consider not internal reasons of the European integration, but a set of external reasons, determined by international environment. Taking into account the growing instability in the world, the world economic crisis, the emergence of new powers, particularly in Asia, the lowering roles of international organizations and revival of force factor, turn to realpolitik, European countries seem to be losing momentum. None of them on their own, even such strong nations as the UK, France and Germany, due to their internal reasons, are no longer capable to conduct an independent foreign policy, based on force, as they do not have enough resources. However, the process of European integration has led to certain unity of European economies, making unilateral economic measures quasi impossible. Yet, as a whole, economically the EU presents a significant power, which couldn’t be ignored, although any attempts to transfer such union on military aspects have been constantly unsuccessful, though still undertaken. European Union even as a whole does not represent a military power, but can be considered a powerful economic actor. 

Though according to realistic theories, emergence of a truly common European foreign and security policy seems highly unlikely, if not impossible, it couldn’t be ignored, that sharing common security interests and lacking capabilities to promote their positions on their own, European states will tend to use the EU framework on the international arena in order to ensure better security. This seems to be totally pragmatic and practical, and though there probably will not be any European Foreign Ministry in a traditional view, we may more and more often see common European positions articulated in response to international challenges. 



The elaboration of common positions



It is considered, that “while the EU aspires to play a greater role, its actorness and effectiveness cannot be taken for granted given the nature of the EU as a multilevel and semi-supranational polity, encompassing 28 member states with diverse foreign policy preferences and positions”.

Since the European member states are the main actors determining the EU common positions, as long as CFSP remains highly intergovernmental, it is vital to pay attention to the variety of positions inside the EU. It goes without saying that European countries are quite different when it comes to interests and capabilities, their foreign policies also have different scales. For some countries, such as the United Kingdom, the European common foreign policy presents an additional option, a chance to extend its influence, but for some others, which are underrepresented in international organizations and fora, the EU dimension may be the only accessible, the only chance to make themselves heard. 

To sum up, there is a “collective and persistent problem of reconciling the continuing, sometimes jealously guarded, capacity for national foreign policymaking with the declared aspiration, and the evolving infrastructure for a common effective European foreign and security policy”. 

The process of taking decisions under the second pillar has been changing from Maastricht to Lisbon; yet, the leading role was always left with the Council, as the “most” intergovernmental institution of the EU. The Lisbon reforms, such as creation of the position of High Representative for Common Foreign and Security policy and the establishment of the EEAS were supposed to introduce certain level of communitarity in the CFSP, making it more “European” – one may remember, that initially, in the project of the EU constitution, the post of Baroness Ashton was supposed to be the minister of foreign affairs. Surely and predictably, states didn’t go as far as to completely delegate their functions in the domain of the foreign policy to the Union’s level. 

All the actual work on elaboration of common positions is conducted in the Council, namely, its foreign affairs formation and the Political and Security Committee, where is conducted most of preparatory work. Particular attention should be paid to the fact, that it is elaborated by the countries’ foreign ministers and other diplomats, acting on behalf of their states and governments, representing their positions. Since the number of countries reached 28, it is quite difficult to achieve a compromise, especially, taking into account the veto right, each country possesses in such questions. Thus, the very system of taking decisions in the field of CFSP demonstrates its intergovernmental nature and leads to the adoption of decision, which constitutes the least common denominator and can barely lead to some real consequences. Though the veto right is considered a major stumbling block in the process of taking decisions in CFSP there are several exemptions, listed in paragraphs 2,3 (Article 31, TEU), for example, in cases when Council adopts decision defining action or position, based on previously adopted decision about Union’s strategic interests and objectives. Decisions, having military consequences may be taken only unanimously. Any Member State may declare its abstention, yet it accepts the decision to be binding to the Union. As it seems, these clauses are intended merely to facilitate the process and to avoid some inconveniences arousing form the obligation to act only unanimously. The core and principal decisions are taken unanimously. 

According to the Treaty on the European Union, the European Council is the body defining strategic interests and objectives of the Union in the form of decisions, acting unanimously on a recommendation from the Council. As for the competence, it “should cover all areas of foreign policy and all questions relating to the Union’s security”. It is important to note, that common foreign and security policy is to be put into effect by High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Member States, which, on the one hand, emphasizes the intergovernmental nature of the CFSP, but on the other, de facto names the HR as a single voice, speaking for the Union as a whole. An interesting question though is how the HR and representatives of the Member States are supposed to cooperate and present commonly agreed positions. 

As for the role of High Representative, it was generally supposed to bring together the Council, Commission and the EEAS, of which the HR is a head. Yet, the role of HR in the Treaty was described quite ambiguously, leaving space to different interpretations, and making the position quite dependent on the personality of a person, which is holding the post. In the case of Baroness Ashton, she seems to be more willing to work with the Council and doesn’t seem to be trying to make EU foreign policy less intergovernmental, at least, when it comes to giving more power to supranational institutions. 

The leading group in foreign policy



It is much said and written about the certain groups in the EU, as the system of votes is designed in a way, which prevents one country, however powerful it is, to act without regard of others. In foreign policy the situation is slightly different, due to its intergovernmental nature and veto right, granted to each member-state. 

Yet, in the field of foreign policy we may say of a certain directoire, the E3, including Great Britain, Germany and France. This group has never been formally institutionalized, nor written down in the Treaties. It simply unites the 3 most powerful countries in terms of foreign presence. Most notable about this group is the presence of the UK, which is usually highly Eurosceptic and trying to keep as far as possible from any supranational initiatives. Yet, for the EU CFSP the UK’s participation is essential, both because of its own political weight and the special relationship with the US. The UK participation is important to the country itself as well, since its position in EU affects its relations with the US, the main ally. 

France has long been an active participant on the international arena, always trying to pursue its foreign policy independently. Being a nuclear power and a permanent UN Security Council member, France is used to perceive itself as a superpower,

“mais nous voulons agir en Europe, nous voulons que l’Europe s’affirme comme un acteur politique du premier plan”

Though being a powerful actor itself, France seeks the participation in EU to enhance its positions, to use the EU for reaching some goals, which it cannot reach on its own.

Germany is the most powerful economy in the EU and one of the strongest economies in the world. Politically, though, the country became known for its rational and moderate positions, being usually not supportive of military actions of any kind. 

According to German Foreign ministry, European Union is a mean for countries to reach common objectives: 

“Nur gemeinsam haben die EU-Mitgliedstaaten spuerbares internationales Gewicht: je grosser die Einigkeit und die Kohaerenz des EU-Aussenhandelns, desto groesser die Handlungsfaehigkeit der EU”.

Thus, the EU is a means of uniting efforts for the European Member States; it provides MS with more capabilities and instruments. 

It is quite interesting to research the nature of the E3 group, whether it is going to be somehow institutionalized or, for instance, changed, in view of UK’s desire to revise its relations with the EU as a whole. Also it can be studied, having access to specific sources, how do the three countries manage to come up with a single European position, since there are sometimes differences among them. 

A specific attention should be drawn to the personality of the official, doing most of the EU representation in the world. After the Treaty of Amsterdam the position of High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy was long held by Javier Solana, who proved to have added value to the position. His active diplomacy, though not always successful, has quite improved the visibility of the EU as a single actor. 

Baroness Ashton, in her turn, is often criticized for being unable to find the agreement between the EU institutions or incapable of performing all her duties as stated in the Treaties. Yet, it should be taken into account the novelty of the position and number of issues the HR has to address. In terms of international presence, Baroness Ashton is certainly trying to speak in the name of united Europe on most occasions.

The handling of international crises



The capability of an actor to perform its policy on international arena is best seen during the crises, which demands of it maximum efforts and demonstrates its capacity to articulate and defend a certain position. In case of the EU it is of special importance since before presenting single position to the world it needs first to arrive to it inside, reach an agreement between 28 countries. In fact, crises, “when speed places a premium on policy-making capacity and the rapid exploitation of appropriate policy instruments” present major challenge for the EU ability to pursue common foreign policy.

As for the means to pursue an agreed policy, it should be said about the sanctions since due to the certain characteristics of the EU as an actor, it may be the only available and effective measure of coercive diplomacy at its disposal. The Council decision stipulates, that “if necessary, the Council will impose autonomous EU sanctions in support of efforts to fight terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and as a restrictive measure to uphold respect for human rights, democracy, the rule of law and good governance”. Yet the sanctions are regarded as a part of a comprehensive approach, including various diplomatic measures. 

The 2003 European Security Strategy enumerated several major threats to the world’s and Union’s security: terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass-destruction, regional conflicts, state failure and organized crime. As for the ways of addressing these issues, the Strategy speaks about “the full spectrum of instruments at our disposal, including political, diplomatic, military and civilian, trade and development activities”.

Thus, first and foremost the EU declares itself at international actor, being able to conduct is policy, protect its citizens and its interests in various regions of the world, though, particular attention is paid to Neighbouring regions, Balkans and Middle East. Also, though always highlighting the cooperation with NATO, especially in the sphere of security, since 2003 the EU also speaks about its own instruments, listing among them not only political and diplomatic, but also military.  

The Israeli-Palestinian case presents a perfect example of how the EU acted throughout the time in finding solution to international crises. Since the establishment of European political cooperation, the countries of European Communities tried to elaborate common positions about the conflict. There have been different opinions and member states disagreed on many issues: France and Italy were more supportive of Arab positions, Germany and the Netherlands – of Israeli. Yet towards 1990-s the countries managed to arrive to a common position and even helped to “facilitate the emergence of a broad international consensus on Middle East peace-making, making it easier for other actors – including the US, Israel and key Arab countries – to later adopt similar views on core parameters of conflict resolution”. It should also be noted, that the EU managed to elaborate a position distinct from the US, although the EU is often blamed on being dependent on the US. 

Yet, despite some success in 1990-s and 2000-s after enlargement there became more difficult to come to a common positions with some of the new member states being closer to the US and Israeli position. The EU became part of the Middle East quartet and strongly advocated the two-states solution. The decision of the Palestine Autonomy to apply for an observer-status in the UN again caused the division among European states. Thus, the Arab-Israeli conflict is a good example of EU conflict resolution, though it may be not considered absolutely successful.

Another famous case testing the EU capacity to conduct common foreign policy was the Iraq crisis of 2003, which brought to a serious division among member states by their attitude to the invasion to Iraq. 

One of the latest examples of MS divisions over international crises, is Germany abstention during the vote in the “no-fly-zone” over Libya in UN Security Council, while France and Great Britain voted “yes”. 

The Iranian case, however, managed to make European member states to arrive to consensus at least about the existence of a threat and necessity to deal with it. As it will be shown later, the discussion about the means existed but it could still be spoken about a single position. 

Iranian case is of particular interest for the study of EU common foreign policy, not only because it includes both handling a global issue – nuclear non-proliferation and bilateral relations with a regional power, but also because it presents almost a unique opportunity to see the EU acting as a single actor with its specific position, interests and means of action. 

In conclusion it should be said, that the goals and means of the EU CFSP are quite well explained by the intergovernmental theory of the European integration, yet the system of world politics returns to realistic basis, thus, only the actors having enough power, would be playing an active role in the future. Since no EU country has enough resources to be considered such an actor, it is expected to act as a whole, at least in cases, when the Member States positions do not vary dramatically. Thus, theoretically, the EU foreign policy remains intergovernmental, though in order to secure their interests in a better way, Member States may seek to elaborate common positions and lead common actions. Though the EU is traditionally criticized for its inability to “speak with one voice” and lack of common positions on many issues, de facto blocking the decision-making process, the case of Iranian nuclear programme may present a certain exception, which could have important consequences for the development of CFSP in the nearest future.





























The European Union’s handling of the Iranian nuclear crisis





Since it has been stated, that the Iranian case is of specific interest due to its dual nature, encompassing both an issue of international security and bilateral relations with a country of a strategically important region, it was considered logical to separate the following chapter into three parts. The first part covers the EU policy on a global issue of non-proliferation of weapons of mass-destruction, namely, the nuclear weapons. The second deals with the EU-Iran relations before and during the nuclear crisis, and the third part focuses on the negotiations with Iran concerning the nuclear programme and the EU’s role in it.  

The EU position on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons





The non-proliferation of weapons of mass destructions and above all the nuclear weapon is one of the most pressing issues of world security. As for the history of the question, when the world powers got nuclear bombs and ways of its delivery, it became evident that such weapon present a terrible threat to human race and its production and usage should be kept under control of international community. The basic document on non-proliferation remains the Non-Proliferation treaty, signed in 1968 and establishing the so-called non-proliferation regime. First of all, it prohibits the transfer of nuclear weapons or it elements not to “assist, encourage, or induce any non-nuclear-weapon State to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, or control over such weapons or explosive devices”. The right to have nuclear weapons was reserved to 5 permanent members of the UNSC, who managed to have nuclear tests done before 1968. Yet, the Treaty wasn’t signed by all UN member-states and didn’t prevent India and Pakistan from becoming nuclear powers, though not officially recognized. 

There is one question, making the control over nuclear non-proliferation more difficult: the Treaty stipulates the right of every country to develop any peaceful nuclear activities in order to produce nuclear energy under the control and surveillance of International Atomic Energy Agency. Yet any peaceful nuclear programme can be potentially turned into a military, aiming at creating nuclear weapons. Thus the instrument of control seems to acquire special importance. The IAEA enforces its control mainly through the system of safeguards, intended to verify the information states provide about their nuclear activities, including access to nuclear facilities. 

Undoubtedly, the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and above all, the nuclear weapon, is one of the security priorities for the Union. Its importance was once again stipulated in the 2003 European Security Strategy, adopted by the European Council and reaffirmed in its 2008 review. According to the Treaty on the European Union (Art.22) the European Council is bound to take decisions on strategic interests and objectives and may refer to specific country, region or issue. 

According to the 2003 EU Security Strategy, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is one of the most serious threats to the Union’s security. Though the Security Strategy is merely a declaration, it outlines “the basis for an European WMD non-proliferation strategy”. In particular, it names the potential risky areas, such as Middle East, North Korea and South Asia, the way of action, enhancing international cooperation, via multilateral fora and organizations, and enumerating some of the instruments at Union’s disposal. 

Later in 2003 the Political and Security Committee presented the “Basic principles for an EU Strategy against Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction”, where the WMD were characterized as extremely dangerous “not only because of their capacity to cause death on a large scale but also because they could destabilize the international system”. The plan of action against any potential threat of the kind is envisaged as follows: political and diplomatic preventative measures and appeal to relevant international organizations (IAEA in the case of nuclear weapons), political dialogue and diplomatic pressure. In case these measures fail, actions should be taken under the Chapter VII of the UN Charter, which, in turn, includes sanctions and other measures up to the use of force. The central role is to belong to the UN Security Council. 

Thus, the EU once again proclaims its adherence to multilateralism, acting within international organizations, namely of the UN system, and in accordance with international law. Also the document once again declares the EU orientation on preventing the threats rather than dealing with it when it is already there. 

In 2003 for the first time the EU has also adopted the EU Strategy against the proliferation of WMD, where again, there were enumerated threats and ways of handling them. Of particular interest there can be possible instruments that EU has available: “multilateral treaties and verification mechanisms; national and internationally-coordinated export controls; cooperative threat reduction programmes; political and economic levers (including trade and development policies); interdiction of illegal procurement activities and, as a last resort, coercive measures in accordance with the UN Charter”. 

There should be mentioned, that the elaboration of a single position in case of nuclear non-proliferation was complicated since member states had and still have different approaches to nuclear weapons and nuclear energy. As already mentioned, two European countries have nuclear weapons, 4 NATO-members participate in the programme of “nuclear sharing”, hosting US nuclear weapons on their territory – Belgium, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands. Among EU member states there are also 4 countries, which are completely nuclear-free and strongly advocate disarmament: Austria, Finland, Ireland and Sweden. Thus, 

“nuclear non-proliferation action of the Union in terms fundamentally different from its role in averting chemical and biological weapons proliferation, as in these fields, all Member States are signatories to the relevant conventions and none possesses those weapons”. 

Different nuclear statuses of EU member states certainly do not facilitate finding compromises and elaborating single positions.  

Particular attention should be drawn to the two of EU member states possessing nuclear weapons under the NPT – the UK and France. Though their nuclear arsenal couldn’t be compared to those of the US and Russia, it still presents a significant deterring power. It is important to study British and French nuclear strategies. 

The UK strategy starts with admitting the fact, that traditional role of the nuclear weapons has changed significantly with the end of the Cold War, yet the refusal of nuclear powers to disarm multilaterally makes British government willing to preserve its nuclear potential in order to keep its ability to deal with existing and possible future threats. One of such threats the paper names “regional powers developing nuclear weapons for the first time”, a definition which may as well be applicable to Iran. Thus, nuclear weapons are a sort of insurance against all possible risks the future may present. The UK already has the smallest amount of nuclear warheads among all official nuclear powers and seeks to reduce its amount provided the success of multilateral efforts for preserving and enhancing the non-proliferation regime, keeping disarmament as a final objective. 

As for France, it not only remains one of 5 legitimate nuclear powers, it has a wide range of nuclear capacities in the sphere of peaceful usage of nuclear energy. In fact about 80% of electric energy in France is produced on nuclear power plants, providing also huge amount of working places. Thus, nuclear energy for France is not only weapon, but a significant part of national economy. 

While mentioning Iran and Korea as major threats to nuclear non-proliferation, official Paris states that:

“les violations par ces Etats de leurs obligations ont ébranlé la confiance de la communauté internationale et sont susceptibles de nuire au développement de la coopération internationale dans le domaine des usages pacifiques de l’énergie nucléaire, au détriment de tous les autres Etats respectuex de leur obligations ».

For France international cooperation in the sphere of peaceful usage of nuclear energy is quite important for economic reasons. As for solution to the problem, French government speaks about the necessity for strengthening the non-proliferation regime, first and foremost through the IAEA. 

As for Iran, France declares its adherence to a double approach, uniting 

“ouverture au dialogue et fermeté face aux agissements iraniens, soutenue par l’adoption de sanctions de plus en plus fortes à l’éncontre de Téhéran”. 

To sum up, both European nuclear powers regard their nuclear weapons as deterrent against real and emerging threats, coming from proliferation. To fight it, they both suggest strengthening of multilateral mechanisms, based on TNP and IAEA. 

It should also be mentioned previous nuclear crises and the way EU handled them. Before Iranian case there could be named 2 major crises of nuclear proliferation, related to India and Pakistan, and North Korea. 

The crisis in India and Pakistan happened in 1998, when both countries led nuclear tests. The only European reply was given in several declarations issued months after the tests and urging countries to join NPT. There could be hardly said about any collective measures: “some Member States – notably Denmark, Germany and Sweden – froze their development aid, other countries like Spain or France abstained from any measures beyond condemnation, because they believe that, as non-signatories to the NPT, these countries were under no obligation to refrain from acquiring nuclear weapons”. 

In case of North Korea, the EU has donated a lot of money to a peaceful development of nuclear energy on Korean peninsula, namely to the KEDO – Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organisation, whose purpose was to persuade North Korea abandon its military nuclear programme in exchange for assistance in construction of reactors for peaceful purposes. Yet, political and diplomatic handling of the proliferation problem on peninsula remained with the US, the EU is not even presented among the participants of the Six-Party-Talks. Different from India and Pakistan, North Korea was a signatory of the NPT, yet withdrew it signature after the nuclear bomb testing. 

In general, previous EU efforts in non-proliferation could hardly be considered persistent or especially successful until the Iranian case.

Iran signed the non-proliferation treaty and was going to start its atomic energy programme in 1970s, aiming at elaborating nuclear activities as source of energy. The Islamic revolution of 1979 changed not only the situation in the country, but its position in the world, making the regime of ayatollahs the arch-enemy of western democracies, namely the USA. At first Islamic government abandoned the nuclear programme, but later, especially in the 1990-s the country returned to the idea of elaborating nuclear energy. In 1995 when Russia and Iran concluded an agreement on building a nuclear power plant in Busher, the US immediately reacted by introducing unilateral economic sanctions on Iran. In 2000s there were numerous concerns about the peaceful character of Iranian nuclear programme, since the government persistently refused to let IAEA experts to its nuclear objects. For quite a long time there was no single opinion about the necessity to intervene in the nuclear programme of the sovereign country, especially taking into account the unstable situation on Middle East. In 2010 members of the UNSC managed to arrive to a resolution #1929, introducing economic sanctions on Iran. It marked a significant change, since for the long period of time two of 5 permanent SC members (Russia and China) opposed to using of sanctions and insisted on Iran’s right to pursue its peaceful nuclear programme. For ten years the negotiations were led in the 6-party form, including permanent members of UNSC plus Germany on the one hand and Iran on the other. 

During the session of 1st Committee of the UN General Assembly, the EU representative envisaged the common position of the Union, to which aligned several non-members. The Representative stated that the main goals and means of the EU in the sphere of nuclear non-proliferation are “effective multilateralism, prevention and international cooperation”. 

The EU once again stresses the importance of the NPT “as a cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime, the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament in accordance with Article VI of the NPT and an important element in the further development of nuclear energy applications for peaceful purposes”.

It may be concluded, that though the EU has always declared its adherence to the NPT and the non-proliferation regime, its actions during the previous proliferation crises were hardly united and did not have any considerable effects. Thus, Iranian case presents a first example of European successful action in the sphere of nuclear non-proliferation. 

2.2 The EU-Iran relations



It is important to briefly characterize the EU relations with Iran before the emerging of the nuclear conflict. Contrast to the US, which never accepted the Islamic State, the EU has wide economic ties with the country and in 2002 was on a verge of signing the Trade and Cooperation Treaty. Moreover, the EU “has always expressed its wish to gradually deepen bilateral relations with the country”. That could be explained by several reasons. 

First of all, Iran is one of the largest suppliers of crude oil in the world and the EU needs fuel. Secondly, the EU is closer to the Middle East region, in fact, after the last enlargement it is even considered as a neighboring region and some countries of the Middle East even participate in the ENP, such as Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine, Syria + Armenia and Azerbaijan (which are neighbours of Iran, though normally are referred to as South Caucasus, rather than Middle East). Thus, the EU is interested in preserving peace and stability at its borders and seeks cooperation with all regional powers, to which Iran does belong without any doubt. 

It should always be remembered that for the EU constructive relationship with Iran is very important in order to “achieve its common security and defense objectives while safeguarding its commercial and energy interests”.

Immediately after the Islamic Revolution of 1979, the relations were nonetheless almost non-existent and they are still very much dependent on the internal situation in the country and its readiness to participate in any form of dialogue. Being unable to ignore some peculiarities of the new Iranian regime, yet needing to establish some form of communication, during the 1990s the EU adopted a form of “critical dialogue” with Iran, criticizing it for human rights problems, support for terrorism and uncompromising position on the Middle East peace process, while still having economic and political relations. After the end of the Cold war, death of Ayatollah Khomeini, and election of Akbar Rafsanjani, the relations between Iran and Europe started to develop progressively: 

“Iran viewed Europe as a source of badly needed credit and investment, while Europe saw Iran – newly free of Soviet influence and still isolated by the US – as an open source for trade and energy resources”.

Election of more moderate Mr. Khatami in 1997 helped to turn the “critical dialogue” into a “comprehensive” dialogue. The period of Mr. Khatami’s presidency may well be considered as the apex of the EU-Iran relations. The dialogue included meeting in Troika format every 6 month and exchange of opinions on global and regional issues. The EU also launched a Human Rights Dialogue. The sharp decline followed in 2002 when Iranian nuclear programme became an issue of international concern.

Being a signatory of NPT, Iran nevertheless refused to sign an additional protocol providing a better safeguard system for nuclear plants, also, in the same time, the IAEA proved, that Iran was building two facilities for production of nuclear weapons. 

 It was the EU, and namely the EU-3, who managed to persuade Iran to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Additional Protocol in 2003 in Paris, paving the way to increase of the IAEA inspections to Iran nuclear objects and, more broadly, to a search of diplomatic and multilateral solution to the problem.  This success was a result of a quite unusual diplomatic action by leading European countries – “although they acted in their capacity as individual states rather than by troika delegation acting on behalf of the Union”. The Foreign Ministers of the UK, France and Germany visited Tehran and managed to persuade Iranian government to a compromise, including signing of the Additional Protocol and suspension of uranium enrichment. This success became a great chance for European diplomacy to establish itself as chief negotiator for Iranian nuclear programme, though the actions of E3 were in no way institutionalized by European institutions. 

From the very beginning of the conflict over Iranian nuclear programme the EU got a more weighted position, contrast to the US, eager to condemn any nuclear activity of the Islamic State. The EU leaders, surely, understood, that Iran nuclear programme may present threats to peace and security, but were bound by contracts and economic ties. Yet with time their official position was only becoming tougher, especially with Mr. Ahmadinejad being elected as the President of the Islamic republic. Not only the anti-Israeli rhetoric of the new President, but also an announcement of the plans for uranium enrichment made it even more difficult for the EU to continue its diplomatic efforts. Javier Solana, the then-European Union’s High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy was the chief western negotiator with Iran and was constantly trying to promote peaceful solution to the problem. Unfortunately, all proposals were rejected by Iranian government. In 2006 the Iranian nuclear dossier was for the first time sent to the UNSC, which eventually led to the introduction of the UN sanctions on the Islamic republic. 

In general, 18 European member-states have embassies in Tehran, including France, Germany, Spain, Italy and others. Iran has embassies in 21 EU MS. The UK is the only big European countries which does not have diplomatic relations with Iran on ambassadorial level. The embassies of two countries remain closed. Yet, recently after a progress in nuclear talks, in November 2013 the UK and Iran both appointed non-resident chargés d’affaires, which may be regarded as a step towards enhancing bilateral relations. 

Germany has strong bilateral relations with Iran, economic and cultural ties.

As is noted by French ministry of foreign affairs,  

“Les relations diplomatiques avec l’Iran ont connu une continuité, y compris au plus fort des tensions politiques. Le bon fonctionnement de nos emprises diplomatiques, afin que le lien direct entre Téhéran et Paris soit maintenu, a toujours constitué une priorité”. 

French diplomatic service declares that despite any problems and disagreements, the direct contact between European countries and Iran should always exist, that is a priority, which could not be simply rejected. 

Economic relations with Iran were the key reason to avoid introduction of oil-related sanctions – the main instrument of coercive diplomacy the EU had at its disposal. It is interesting to mention, that within the EU there was no single opinion on the necessity of sanctions. In 2006 there were first sanctions on Iran introduced under the auspices of the UN. In 2007 France and Great Britain were supporting the introduction of even more European sanctions, but the coalition of Italy, Germany and Austria didn’t support this initiative. In 2010 when the sanctions were reinforced the discussion within the EU remained. New set of sanctions were aimed not only at the nuclear activities, but to the oil export, that constitutes the base of EU-Iranian economic and trade relations. 

“The EU27 as a combined entity was Iran’s second-largest trading partner, with 27 billion Euros worth of bilateral trade – just over 16% of total Iranian trade. The EU served as Iran’s second-largest export market and third-largest source of imports. During the same year, Iran was the eighth-largest exporter of fuel to the EU”.

Iranian oil export to the EU constitutes 92,4% of country’s total export to the EU and 18% of its total oil export. Oil remains important energy source for the EU and the union’s Member States highly depend on export from outside the EU. While discussing the oil embargo, several countries, especially those, hit by the economic crisis, Greece, Italy and Spain were against sanctions, claiming that Iran would easily find other importers for its products. 

“Iranian officials continue to try to make European states reverse their position by highlighting the long-term costs Europe will face if it continues to isolate the Islamic Republic”.

Indeed, Iran managed to change the structure of its exports and now among its primary partners one will find Asian countries, such as China, India, Turkey, South Korea and Japan, although absolute majority of exports’ structure still constitutes petroleum. As for imports, major partners are United Arab Emirates, China, Turkey and South Korea. Moreover, new partners established some ways for avoiding the effect of sanctions, which affect not only the crude exports of oil, but also the transportation and insurance, which makes it more difficult to avoid them: supporting infrastructure of the oil transportation is way better developed in the Western countries, although India and Japan were trying to the provide necessary support to the Iranian vessels, transporting oil. Although the EU managed to find other sources of energy (e.g. Greece replaced Iranian oil with Russian), there were some cases of breaching the sanctions, and for example the case of Greek businessman, supplying tankers to Iran, was even heard before the ECJ in 2011.

According to the UK Foreign Office, “EU sanctions against Iran are not intended to affect humanitarian goods and payments – we have no quarrel with the people of Iran. This is why there are a number of explicit exemptions to allow Iran to purchase humanitarian goods such as medicines. The UK issues, as a priority, licenses for transactions for humanitarian goods”. 

Still, the effectiveness of sanctions is quite controversial, since Iranian economy was not crushed, and the popular opinion was still supporting the Government and the nuclear program.  

The EU-led negotiations with Iran



In 2002 the reveal of the fact that Iran operated two nuclear sites at Natanz and Arak has worsened the relations between Iran and the EU. The nuclear question became for some time a main issue in a dialogue between countries. 

The US immediately wanted to address the issue to the UN Security Council, but the EU3 disagreed and insisted on continuation of the dialogue. While the EU was trying to negotiate, the US “labeled Iran part of the “Axis of Evil” along with Iraq and North Korea”. 

When the IAEA wanted for the first time to address Iranian issue to the UN SC, the EU representatives “decided instead to find a way forward that would give Iran an opportunity to dispel concerns and prove that the aims of its nuclear programme were entirely peaceful. The IAEA’s Board of Governors agreed to delay a report to the Security Council to give the European initiative a chance”.

Thus, from the very start, when the nuclear problem in Iran just emerged, the European Union was trying to avoid any coercive measures and to settle the dispute peacefully. At the moment such approach presented a contrast to the US actions, the EU acted as a mediator between the US and Iran, in a way, even advocating the Islamic Republic. 

As it has been mentioned already, in 2003, foreign ministers of the EU’s “Big Three”, and Javier Solana, the Union’s representative for foreign affairs and security policy, managed to persuade Tehran to agree to several quite important steps, namely, to suspend uranium enrichment, present detailed plans of their nuclear activities and to sign the Additional Protocol to Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, allowing more IAEA control over any nuclear activities. The so-called Paris Agreement became a major success of the European diplomacy, adding legitimacy to its approach. 

Yet, the relations with Iran are highly dependent on the country’s internal situation. The compromise reached in 2003 was not accepted unilaterally among Iranian authorities and public. The nuclear energy (since the country never admitted making any type of nuclear weapons) for Iran is a question of technological progress, and independence of its programme is important for national sovereignty. Taking into account such perception, it is impossible to imagine that Iran would ever agree to abandon any nuclear activities, since it could lead to destabilization and even possible crush of the regime. Nuclear energy and independence of nuclear programme have become a national idea, a national interest, which the whole nation has to defend. This should be remembered also while analyzing the impact of economic sanctions. 

After the election of Mr. Ahmadinejad, Iran did not only change its rhetoric, but also did not adhered to previous agreements and refused to present information about its nuclear facilities to international authorities. 

Once again the Iranian question was presented in the UN Security Council, and the US demanded quick and tough actions. For some time the EU, impersonated by its foreign policy chief, Javier Solana, remained the only negotiator with Iran. 

In 2005 EU-3 offered a package of incentives for Iran, “Framework for a long-term Agreement” and even “secured the backing of the US for this package, which included the lifting of a US sanction on Iranian WTO entry and the sale of spare parts to Iranian civilian airliners”.

In 2006, the EU managed to persuade its partners in EU-3+3 negotiations to join its new proposal to Iran. The proposal was approved by as representatives of China, France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom, the United States and the European Union, highlighting the role of the EU along with three European nations. The negotiators assured that their goal was “the establishment of international confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme”. As preconditions for starting negotiations the EU3+3 admitted the Iran’s right to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes as stated in the NPT, and, even more important, provide active support to building light water reactors through international projects in accordance with IAEA and NPT. Iran, in return, was supposed to suspend all enrichment activities and cooperate with the IAEA. For its part, EU proposed also negotiation and implementation of a Euroatom-Iran nuclear cooperation agreement. As for other terms, the EU suggested specific help in integrating Iran to international economy, namely, through concluding a Trade and Economic Cooperation Agreement with EU. 

These proposals could be seen as part of the EU “stick and carrot” method, meaning acceptance some key points of Iranian position and help in realization of Iran’s right to peaceful nuclear energy in exchange for guarantees of its adherence to NPT principles and rules. The EU never questioned Iran’s right to peaceful usage of nuclear energy, and, moreover, was ready to accept Iranian guarantees, that always strengthened its negotiating position, compared to, for example the US, influenced by the hard-edged Israeli position.  

The proposals were agreed on the 1st of June and backed by the UN SC Resolution #1696, once again expressing the UN’s concerns about the Iran nuclear programme and necessity to deal with it through the IAEA. 

Yet, Iran declined this proposal, and its nuclear dossier in the UN Security Council for the first time lead to approval of the UN sanctions, by resolution #1737. The Resolution said that all member-states should prevent the supply, sale or transfer to Iran anything (including items, materials, goods, technology, technical or financial assistance) that could be used for Iran’s enrichment activities, related with production of nuclear weapons. This was the first time when the UN SC actually agreed on a wide range of sanctions, for now related to the nuclear enrichment processes and production of nuclear weapons. 

The EU could not, though, abandon the demand for permanent suspension of the nuclear enrichment, the main demand of all negotiators. Only Germany tried to leave Iran some enrichment capacity, but its European partners and the US didn’t agree. 

Despite the sanctions, the EU was willing to continue negotiations with Iran and Javier Solana was often meeting with Iranian authorities. Yet, the deadlock in negotiations encouraged France and Great Britain to support introduction of new sanctions, the EU sanctions, separate from the UN. These proposals were rejected by several countries, such as Germany, Italy and Austria, which claimed that “separate EU sanctions would only serve to undermine the standing of the EU as a negotiator and also fail to provide new solutions”. 

In 2006 the EU was Iran’s major trading partner with approximately 30% of market share. Also, the EU, dependent on import of fuel, could not ignore the role of Islamic Republic in energy supplies. 

Later, the EU constantly underlined its adherence to the principle of using both dialogue and pressure, being always ready to negotiate, yet not putting the sanctions completely off the table. 

In 2008 the group of negotiators launched a revised package of proposals, yet, due to worsening of bilateral relations with the US (still considering Iran as a part of “Axis of Evil”) led to the absence of the US during the meetings in 2008. After the change of the US administration in 2008, it proclaimed a different approach towards Iran, more moderate and opened to negotiations. 

Unfortunately, Iranian leadership was not ready to collaborate with international community. Aggressive rhetoric of Mr. Ahmadinejad, contested results of presidential elections and refusal to stop enrichment processes made the negotiations in following years more difficult, and did not lead to any results. The parties put on table new proposals, but Iran refused to let any control over its enrichment facilities to international bodies. 

In 2011 IAEA found information about Iran developing activities for acquiring military nuclear technology, which contributed to the existing concerns about Iranian nuclear programme.

In 2012 the persistent refusal of Iran to let international observers to its nuclear facilities led to an escalation of the conflict, which resulted in introduction of non-nuclear-related sanctions on Iran. There could be actually spoken of the 2 set of sanctions: the UNSC sanctions and the autonomous EU sanctions.

The EU sanctions have been adopted in a form of Council regulations. Actually the sanctions have been approved during the whole period from 2010 to 2012, aiming firstly at arms and related materials, all dual-use goods and technology and all products that could “contribute to enrichment-related, reprocessing or heavy water-related activities, to the development of nuclear weapon delivery systems or to the pursuit of activities related to other topics about which the IAEA has expressed concerns”.

The list of various trade sanctions imposed on Iran could be long enumerated, yet, since the main item of trade between Iran and the EU was oil, all measures taken before 2012 could hardly have any significant impact on the bilateral trade balance. 

In 2012, however, despite serious internal disagreements, the EU finally adopted a ban on the most sensitive item of bilateral trade with Iran – crude oil. Even more important could be measures prohibiting providing by the EU banking and insurance assistance to Iranian oil export, due to the dominance of the EU and the US insurance and banking systems in the world. 

Despite the sanctions, the EU didn’t abandon the desire to solve the problem by diplomatic means. Moreover, “the thinking among EU member states is also that heavy sanctions should help to stave off the threat of a pre-emptive strike by Israel on Iranian nuclear facilities, with all its imaginable consequences”. At the same time the EU kept proposing to Iran a package of incentives such as technological support for peaceful nuclear programme and the normalization of economic relations. 

Unfortunately, any talks with Iran ended without any success, due to the position of Iranian government, unwilling to negotiate its right to pursue nuclear programme without any international control. Whatever incentives the EU could offer, they would not break the deadlock, caused by the inability of parties to agree on crucial issues. 

Yet, in the summer of 2013, there have been some major changes in Iran –tough negotiator Mr. Ahmadinejad during the presidential elections was replaced by much more moderate Mr. Rouhani. This change was immediately perceived as a new chance to finally reach some progress in the on-going negotiations process. The EU declared its readiness to act as an intermediary between the new Iranian government and the USA. Yet there were even expectations of possible improvement of Iran-US relations. 

For the first time after 2005 the Iranian government expressed willingness to return to negotiations and trade the nuclear issues on the repeal of the sanctions regime. 

There could be spoken of not only the role of the change of leadership, but also of the effect, that the sanctions had on Iran. Although the estimations of the sanctions effectiveness vary, they gave the European negotiators another incentive for the talks with Iran. Before the sanctions were introduced, there have been a certain misbalance of the proposals presented by the parties. Thus, the EU always set some preconditions for negotiations, which Iran refused to accept: these preconditions were almost unilateral, since Iran was demanded to stop the enrichment activities and in return was offered only an acknowledgement of its right to pursue its peaceful nuclear programme. Surely, that was too weak an offer for an equal exchange. The lifting of the sanctions is, however, a point strong enough to propose in exchange for stopping the uranium enrichment activities. 

Although the negotiations didn’t go smoothly, during the 23-24th November 2013 Geneva talks the parties finally came to an agreement, which was immediately called a new step in the process and a way out of the conflict. EU was definitely playing a role of peace-broker among Iran and the US and its success couldn’t be denied. According to Geneva Agreement Iran is going to stop its enrichment activity (enrichment of the uranium over 5%), won’t introduce any new activities for the enrichment and let the IAEA experts and inspectors in. In exchange the EU and the U.S. are going to suspend all sanctions related to export of oil – which is apparently the major concession to the country, since petrochemical export is vitally important for its economy.  The EU will put an end to some of the sanctions already in December. It is interesting to observe the difference in the document: while the EU takes an obligation not to impose any new nuclear-related sanctions, the US obligation sounds somewhat more ambiguous: 

 “No new EU nuclear-related sanctions”

“The U.S. Administration, acting consistent with the respective roles of the President and the Congress, will refrain from imposing new nuclear-related sanctions”.

Thus the US government merely agrees not to impose any further sanctions on Iran – which may be explained by the strong opposition to the agreement with Iran by a Republican Congress. It remains a question, whether the President would be able to make Congress comply with the Agreement reached in Geneva, for its violation of the Joint Plan would put at risk the whole negotiations process. Although the EU has to bring together the positions of 28 countries in comparison to one U.S. Government, surprisingly enough it appears to be more able to promote a single position and guarantee its realization. Therefore the EU seems to be more reliable partner.  The US had tough debates in Congress, while discussing the adequacy of reached agreement with Iran. Namely, there were raised questions of national security, claims about the disproportional sanctions reliefand the risks, world is taking, suspending sanctions regime. Though it did not prevent the US government from holding its end of the deal now, such discussions in Congress may indicate that reaching final Agreement with Iran will not be easy and the US will demand more concessions from the Islamic Republic. 

Yet, for now, as a result of the Agreement, highly welcomed by international community, mostly as a sign of final ending of a deadlock, there could be spoken of a gradual downgrade of tensions. Iran and its Western partners seem to stick to agreed obligations: the Iranian compliance to the deal has been confirmed by the IAEA report, the EU and the US have, subsequently, suspended their sanctions.

Thus it can be concluded, that while tackling the Iranian nuclear problem, the EU was favouring the diplomatic solution to the crisis, was constantly trying to avoid any escalation and sometimes even remained the only intermediary between the U.S. and Iran. As long as diplomatic measures alone were not able to change the position of Iranian government, the EU imposed several series of economic sanctions, under the mandate of the UN, but going further than the United Nations. Yet, with the change of political leadership in Iran and shift to a more moderate politics, the EU immediately returned to the negotiations, claiming its readiness to put an end to the regime of economic sanctions. 












3. The Iranian nuclear problem as an example of European Union’s handling international crises

3.1 “The European approach”



The situation with Iran and the EU dealing with it has often attracted attention of scholars studying the European common foreign and security policy. When it comes to CFSP, the EU is normally criticized for the lack of coherence, for the inability to react when it comes to issues of world politics, for not having enough resources to pursue its interests, if, in fact, it manages to elaborate common interests. It was noted, that “Iran has to some degree become a test case for the CFSP”, though it could be argued that while the European common foreign and security policy is being formed, almost any crisis will be testing its viability and effectiveness. Yet, Iranian case does have certain peculiarities, which make it special for the European foreign policy. Some specific conditions of the Iranian crisis made it possible to say that “Iran offers Europeans a chance to give substance to the idea that there is a European approach to managing security issues”.  

Throughout the whole period of the Iranian nuclear crisis there could be indeed seen a distinct European approach, which did not change much during the years. The EU has steadily promoted cooperation and negotiations, and backed diplomatic solution of the Iranian crisis. This approach has often been described as “sticks and carrots”, highlighting the European attempt to unite diplomatic and coercive measures, balance between persuasion and demands. 

There could be formulated some key characteristics of the European involvement in the Iranian crisis:

-the EU was in a better negotiating position as compared to some other partners: it had close and long established relations with Iran and yet, these relations are not openly hostile, rather based on mutual interests.  The EU always had certain pragmatism dictated by its energy and economic dependence on Iran, it is more interested in stability in the Middle East, and, finally, is relatively free from any kind of lobby of anti-Iranian Middle East states (such as Israeli lobby in the US). 

-The EU has been better regarded in the Middle East as a whole and in Iran particularly than the major Western power – the US. Despite all tensions, the EU has better reputation in an Arab world, though it is often accused of lacking its own initiatives and acting the way the US tells it to act. For instance, its position in the Middle East Quartet is quite distinct from the US, which should be remembered. Although the relations with the US have always been a priority, “while the European states and the US grew more unified in their approach to Iran, Tehran remained reluctant to negotiate with Washington without the major European states at the table.” Thus, the EU basically secured the role of mediator between the US and Iran: though Iran did not regard the EU as a friendly power, it still got more trust than the US.  

-the EU managed to come up with a single position and with a distinct group of negotiators + official representative of the Union for foreign affairs. In some periods of the crisis the EU-3 was the sole negotiator with Iran. The representative of the EU is, actually, considered to be the leader of the E3+3 negotiations. This both reflects and emphasizes the role the EU foreign chief has in the process, and gives the additional publicity to the person holding this position. 

-the much spoken of “dual approach” – combination of sticks and carrots, using both diplomatic and coercive measures, trading technological support in exchange for nuclear safety guarantees, readiness to make concessions. There could also be noted the concentration on the nuclear issue – without the demand of the regime change “While the various post-1979 US administrations have repeatedly emphasized that the primary problem with Iran is the regime, the EU3 have always emphasized that since 2003 their primary concern has been the nuclear issue and not the regime per se”. The EU has proven itself determined to speak to any Iranian leadership, however anti-West it may seem, and however difficult it may be to negotiate with. 

This position included the recognition of Iranian right to have nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in accordance with the international law and the IAEA regulations, the approach, which is applicable to any country, pursuing a nuclear programme, without any referring to the Iranian regime. 

In general, the EU approach could be described as combination of constant negotiation process and determination to solve all conflicts peacefully with a readiness to apply strict measures, even self-limiting (in case of oil export sanctions). The EU did not question the right of Iran to develop its nuclear programme as long as it provided the firm guarantees of its peaceful character. Moreover, in exchange for such guarantees, the EU was even ready to help Iran with technologies and materials – at some point it was ready to supply to Iran the enriched uranium in order to prevent Iran from development of enrichment activities on its soil. 

In terms of the internal cooperation among European member states, there is evidence of a certain disagreement namely when it comes to oil-related sanctions. If we look at the situation from the point of view of nuclear non-proliferation, on a global level it demonstrates a high level of cooperation, despite the differences in the Member States nuclear statuses. When it comes to global issues, when we look at, for example, voting in the UN Security Council, all the EU members have always voted the same way for the resolutions concerning nuclear non-proliferation and Iran. 

It is interesting to note, that the Iranian crisis didn’t cause or lead to any change in terms of the EU foreign policy organization. The EU CFSP didn’t become less intergovernmental, the common threat did not lead to any drift to supranationalisation; on the contrary, there has emerged a certain triumvirate of Germany, France and the UK, which alongside the HR have officially represented the EU during the negotiations. The group is not officially appointed, neither written down in the Treaties – thus, it is a step forward in intergovernmental cooperation, since the decision-taking process moved literally from 28 countries in the Council to just 3, the most powerful in terms of external representation. The balancing instrument may be the HR, but for now the holder of the post mostly acts as a mediator among the negotiators, including the E3 countries. Yet, the crisis contributed to the strengthening of the role of HR –Solana was able to gain for the EU international presence mostly on occasions, related to the Iranian crisis. 

So, basically, there could be seen two tendencies: more intergovernmental cooperation, narrowed to the EU-3 (since it’s easier to get to one position in a group of 3, rather than in a group of 28) and the role of the HR, as the spokesperson of the Union increased and its recognition in the world improved. Actually, it may be even presumed, that the HR was representing the EU while talking to the EU-3, and helping them to come together with a single Union position, taking into account the positions of other states. 

The format of negotiations, having three European countries presented independently and the EU foreign policy chief allows presuming, that despite all the innovations to the CFSP, it is still formed not in Brussels, but in national capitals, and the EU officials do not have any position, distinct from those of the member states. 

As it comes for now, the EU handling of the Iranian nuclear crises may be considered a success, since the parties have come to a sort of agreement. The role of the internal changes in the Islamic Republic in 2013 is quite important and it could not be predicted how the situation would develop in case the Ahmadinejad government stayed at power. 

The other thing, that should necessarily be mentioned, are the certain unique conditions of the Iranian case, which may well make it a single example of such Union’s diplomatic success. These unique conditions are: 

1) Absence of the US-Iran direct contact left the EU as a sole Western negotiator and a sort of mediator between Iran and the US;

 2) historically the EU has intense and quite good relations with Iran, being its important economic partner, having tense economic, political and cultural relations with the Islamic Republic, having both incentives and leverages to negotiate with the Iran;

 3) unity inside the EU about the nuclear proliferation danger and concerns about Iran’s possible acquiring of nuclear weapons, especially taking into account the geographic proximity of the Middle East to the EU – much less concern about, for example, India and Pakistan or North Korea; relative unity, indeed, but not the case of Iraq – all EU Member States – members of the UN Security Council always voted the same way in case of Iran, which didn’t work out in almost all other crises, so close as Iranian;

 4) the change of Iranian government, when the Rouhani government agreed to negotiations and some concessions, which made it possible to declare the success of the sanctions as part of the European approach, to demonstrate, that political solution is indeed possible. 

 3.2 EU and its partners



Each actor of international relations should be recognized by other major players, otherwise all its efforts would never be met with support. In case of the EU it is vital for it to be recognized as equal participant of negotiations by its partners, namely, the US, Russia and China, and, undoubtedly, by Iran. 

There are two major issues: 1) the EU should be seen as actor as whole, not European countries separately. This idea is complicated by the dual representation in the board of negotiators – there are three European countries with active foreign policy positions unable and unwilling to give them up and a representative of top European bureaucracy, the top European diplomat – in the beginning, Mr. Solana, and, lately, Baroness Ashton. 

2) The ability of the EU to influence the positions of the other negotiators

Since it could be stated, that the EU did have its own approach to tackling the crisis in Iran, it is important to see, whether it was able to persuade its partners. There could be several crucial moments: first of all, the very beginning of the crisis, then, 2006, and 2013 with a change in Iranian government. At first – the EU was against bringing the Iranian dossier to the UN SC, wanting to solve the problem using only diplomatic measures and, what is even more important, was able to persuade its partners and the IAEA to postpone this measure and to give Iran chance to prove that its nuclear programme presented no threat to international peace and security. In 2006, the EU was left to be the only negotiator on behalf of the West, since the Iranian government was not very cooperative. Even for the EU it was hard to continue to restrain from coercive measures, which finally were imposed in 2008. In 2013 the EU once again played a very important role, while shortly after the change of the Iranian regime it claimed its readiness to act as a negotiator between the US and Iran, wishing to facilitate the would-be historic reconciliation. Although the idea didn’t quite work out, the effort was remarkable and contributed to the EU’s “glory” in terms of forging its common foreign policy. 

Interesting to see the difference in the positions of the EU and the US (the EU was more pro-dialogue, the US – more proactive). The problem for the EU is developing its own position, independent, or, at least, less dependent on the US. For many EU Member States the US is quite important, as, for example, for one of the most powerful EU countries - the UK. “Historically, Europe had taken an independent approach to Iran, often acting as a counterweight to the US”. The EU has always kept in touch with the US and never proposed anything that the US would find inacceptable. Yet, there is also an opinion, that a too close siding with the US, sharing its position “will not necessarily preserve the EU’s interests and can perhaps even undermine Europe’s stance on a number of regional issues”.  

The possibility for close cooperation between the EU and Russia – the positions had some points in common, for instance, the support of diplomatic approach over military and even coercive. It is so often spoken of difference between the EU and Russian positions, though initially they were quite close, indeed, they had some common grounds. Russia was involved in the nuclear programme of Iran; it was actually building the country’s first nuclear reactor and, therefore, was not interested in sanctions of any sort towards its partner. In the same time, Russia too did not want to have nuclear power at its doorstep, and even less – any armed conflict close to its borders and the region of strategic importance – Central Asia. Since the very beginning of the crisis, Russia was constantly against any attempts to introduce sanctions against Iran, as did the EU, though European rhetoric was more critical. In the most difficult periods of the crisis, however, both Russia and leaders of the EU3 were opposing any idea of military intervention to Iran, both from the US and Israel – such measures were considered absolutely inacceptable. When it comes, however, to the perception of the EU as a single actor, Russia is an example of how this perception does not work. During the negotiations’ process, Russian officials considered the EU foreign policy chief as merely a technical figure, having not enough authority to handle issues of international security. Thus, Russia tended to discuss Iranian crisis directly with the representatives of the EU Member States, namely, the EU-3, as it used to do in tackling issues of bilateral cooperation between the EU and Russia. 

It is vital also to see the Iranian perception of the EU as a negotiator: was Iran ready to accept it as a negotiator, was it eager to negotiate with the EU, more than with for example, the US. There could be said of a certain idea of the EU as “lesser evil” than the US, yet, part of the West: “traditional conservatives and reformists argued for an agreement to be reached with the Europeans to divide the West and maintain European support as a counterweight to US ambitions in Iran”. Iranian leadership tried to stress the benefits of economic cooperation, which should have brought the parties to an agreement. There is also a notion of geographic proximity of the EU to Iran – when compared to the US. Iranian government has always promoted the idea, that regional issues should be solved without international (American) interference. Iran regards itself as a regional power, and is determined to undermine the US influence in the region. 

According to the research, conducted by Sh. Pakfar, Iran considered the EU could not be seen as an independent power, its credibility was questioned because of its close relations with the US and “double standards”, if compared, for example, its attitude towards nuclear programme in Iran and North Korea or India and Pakistan. Also it was quite unclear who is responsible for the EU decisions, taking into account the Lisbon Treaty reforms and a complicated structure of the EU itself. 

To draw a conclusion, the EU partners in the EU3+3 negotiations lacked common perception of its role. It is often said that the US left the Iranian problem on the EU, wishing to distance itself further, having its hands tied by Iraq and Afghanistan, lately, by Libya and Syria. The EU, thus, had a unique chance to present itself as a chief western negotiator, presenting the common position of the West. Russia did not share the position with the US, but usually was able to arrive to some sort of common grounds with the EU, though having doubts in the EU independence and actorness, preferring to speak to the EU Member States. 

As for Iran, it did regard the EU as a more confortable partner to negotiate with, as compared to the US, due to economic ties and the apparent unwillingness of the EU to use force and get another active conflict in the neighbouring region. 

Thus, it could be said, that the EU partners had different perception of its role in the negotiation process and its ability to act independently. 

3.3 The prospects of EU approach in the final solving of the Iranian case and in future international crises



There could be again spoken of two dimensions: perspectives and limits, applicable to Iran on the one hand and other crises on the other.  In the Iranian case there should be said of the perspectives to solve the Iranian nuclear problem “once and for all” and the growing role of the EU in the process. The important question is still whether the sanctions’ regime was a success or the main reason for progress in negotiations is the change in the Iranian government.

 Actually, the success of the negotiations much depends on the Iranian party and the relations among Iran and negotiators often changed according to the changes in the Iranian government. There are certain limits as for the final solving of the Iranian crisis: 

1) Military intervention is no option since Iran is too big a country, a regional leader, with large army and population; no resources for military intervention;

 2) As for the coercive measures, almost all of them, including the most severe sanctions, have been already imposed; 

3) Idea of compromise, possible to be achieved right now; Iranian government is ready to finally get to compromise, to make some important concessions, so there is a certain “window of opportunities” for peaceful solution, which the negotiators are likely to use. Neither of the parties is now interested in any escalation of the conflict, not least since there are other crises, demanding immediate attention. 

Thus, for the nearest future, the major prospects are the continuation of the negotiations, keeping the obligations taken under the last plan of actions, negotiating over the details of final agreement, monitoring the situation. For now both the Iranian government and its partners in the EU3+3 fulfill all the necessary obligations. The EU adopted the decision to suspend its oil-related sanctions for the next 6-months; Iran suspended all its enrichment activities. During these 6 months the parties are supposed to reach the final agreement, which is highly possible in case there are no accidents. 

The acquisition of a nuclear weapon of any kind is not only a threat in itself, it would “trigger a wave of proliferation in the Middle East”, thus burying the idea of Middle East as a nuclear-free zone. The idea was first presented to UN General Assembly in 1974 by Iran itself and Egypt and may be revived now with the support of major international powers. 

This idea has already been questioned because of the de-facto nuclear Israel, but as a reaction to Iranian bomb there may be even further escalation in the region with Saudi Arabia and Turkey following in the Iranian and Israeli footsteps. Though, for example, there is an idea of nuclear Iran as counterbalance to nuclear Israel, it is still a risk that majority of countries isn’t ready to take. 

Iran persistently denies the accusations of working on getting a nuclear weapon, but unstable situation in the region and hostile environment make highly possible that this idea have crossed the minds of Iranian leadership, since the nuclear bomb is the best way to guarantee the country’s safety and independence. 

Still, in case of successful resolution of the current Iranian crisis, there could be the resurrection of the idea of Middle East as a nuclear-weapon free zone at least as an issue for discussions. Unfortunately, the perspectives of this idea being realized are quite vague until the final settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which remains the major Middle East security problem. 

The question remains: would the EU enjoy the same success in future crises, applying the same approach, combining negotiations and coercive measures such as sanctions? There are two crises at present with active European involvement: one, Syrian, is ongoing and the other, Ukrainian, may well be only emerging. In both cases the EU plays an important role and has to deal with other powers, namely, Russia and the US. 

The Syrian crisis lasts already for several years and has turned into a full-fledged civil war. In the beginning of the mass protests in Syria, the EU openly sided with the rebels, protesting against the policy of president Bashar-al-Asad, and openly confronted Russia and China on the issue in the UN SC. The EU has blamed the regime of Bashar-al-Asad in violation of human rights and suspended all the negotiations on bilateral programmes with the country. Also the Union gave a lot of money in humanitarian assistance. There were severe sanctions adopted against Syrian leadership, bans on import of arms, on export of oil and petroleum products, financial restrictive measures. Yet the situation in Syria remains critical, the civil war is going on. 

Apparently, the EU is imposing the same set of measures as it did in the case of Iran, but the situation is different. First of all, Syria lacks the component of international security issue, such as nuclear non-proliferation (especially after the solution of the chemical weapon problem), and it becomes an internal conflict with hardly any implications to European security. The economic ties with Syria are not that intense as with Iran, so they could be much more easily cut off. It seems obvious that the EU has either no means to influence Syrian regime, or no real interest in the crisis. Moreover, main negotiators in this case remain the US and Russia, presenting opposite position. It could be said that existing status quo, preserving the current state of civil war and failure of any attempts to stop it clearly indicates the absence of common position among key players and inability to influence the situation in any way. 

Ukrainian crisis presents even a more complicated case – Ukraine is part of European continent, the EU clearly has interests in a country, in fact, it is one of the key players in the situation. On the opposite side, there is Russia, willing to keep its influence over Ukrainian state or territory, which can be accepted neither by the EU, nor by the US. The Union declared its support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, yet, the legitimacy of present Kiev leadership, and, thus, presidential elections they conduct seems questionable. Moreover, in the various parts of the country flourish separatist movements and Kiev seems unable to exercise control over them. 

Russia has been regarded as a principal opponent in this case, especially due to its annexation of Crimean peninsula. Though the case was clearly perceived as a violation of international law, the reaction of both EU and the US was quite moderate, and so was a set of sanctions, finally adopted. 

Calm reaction to the situation in Ukraine seems even stranger, taking into account the extreme geographic proximity of a country to EU’s borders and real threat to European threat and security. If not regulated, Ukraine and, possibly, Moldova, may constitute new Balkans, which is hardly desired by any of the EU Member States. On the other hand, risk of confrontation with Russia makes set of tools, available to the EU quite limited: Russia is too important as global security actor and economic partner. As for Ukraine, the EU is trying to negotiate with Kiev government, offers economic support. 

There could hardly be spoken of any single position of all European member States about Ukraine, since it appears that some Member States, notably, the neighbours, may have their own interests in the region. Other Member States are too concerned with their bilateral relations with Russia and have no desire to worsen it over Ukraine. 

The two crises, briefly overlooked above, may as well become test-cases for European common foreign policy, indeed, they do put to a test European approach to tackling crises. As for Syria, the EU participated in negotiations and imposed sanctions, yet its position was far less balanced than in case of Iran – it openly sided with Syrian opposition. As for sanctions, EU lacked necessary incentives – its economic ties with Syria were not crucial for both economies. Finally, the outbreak of a civil war made peaceful diplomatic solution imposed from outside even more complicated. 

In Ukraine the crisis is only moving towards its apex, so it is hard yet to say, how the situation will develop. For now, the EU failed to come up with a single, clearly articulated position and to do anything against practical annexation of Ukrainian territory. The memory of Balkans may, as well, play its role, leading to reluctance of European Member States to intervene in regional conflict at its doorstep. 

The new conflicts present new challenges to the EU CFSP. As in case of Ukraine, the EU is expected to act as a single body, since its main “carrot” for Ukraine always was and remains the membership, though it is quite impossible in the nearest future. Yet, it is much harder to stick to negotiations and coercive but not military measures, when the EU is no mediator, but a side of a conflict. 

The same in Syria – by siding with Syrian opposition, the EU practically abandoned any chance to negotiate with Syrian leadership. As it was shown, the position of mediator was one of the key reasons of European success in Iran. The EU can play between interests of sides of conflict, but is not cohesive and strong enough to actually be a part of a conflict and defend its interest. That sort of action demands better resources and degree of cohesion, that EU possesses at the moment. 

During the Iranian case, The EU proved itself capable as a negotiator, promoting peaceful, civilized, diplomatic solutions to the crises, ready to enforce coercive measures, even though they may not have widespread support in the Union. Also, it has once again demonstrated its activity in the field of international peace and security – the field, which is traditionally considered to be reserved only for the states. This does not mean, however, that the EU turned into a some sort of state and will now and later on pursue a common foreign and security policy. The EU could rather be considered as an alliance, acting together for better securing its interests which happen to be common for this particular case. This “alliance” is presided by a kind of triumvirate of 3 its leading powers and the High Representative for CFSP as a mediator, ensuring this compromise is adhered to. 

However there are still some limitations to the EU actions, too many specific conditions, applicable only to Iranian situation, including the common position on the problem (more or less) – at least, absence of major and visible disagreements (such as in cases of Libya or Iraq). There was a common position on the global issue (nuclear non-proliferation) – in the end, none of the EU countries wished and wishes to have a nuclear-capable regional power at its doorstep. There have been no changes in intergovernmental format of pursuing common foreign policy, which is a limitation, since the activity of the EU in any future crisis will depend on the ability of 28 (or at least the EU-3) to find a compromise among themselves, which is not an easy thing to do, as previous crises have proven. 

In general, though the Iranian case could be seen as a success, and has can offer some positive directions for the development of the EU CFSP, it is still rather an exclusive situation, offering the EU a good chance to prove itself as a negotiator. Yet the conditions for this crisis were determined by many factors and there are few chances that they would appear again in other crises. The EU needs to have more of positive examples of its foreign activities and to strengthen its own approach to make it less dependent on external variables. In the Iranian equation, the main element, and the main variable, de-facto, was Iran, and the Iranian government, since finally the success of the negotiations always depended on its will and readiness to cooperate. Whether the EU and US – led coercive measures contributed to some internal changes in Iran is a question for further investigation, but it is quite obvious, that permanent negotiations-oriented position of the EU has indeed contributed to high probability of the Iranian crisis being solved peacefully. 






Conclusion 



The aim of the research was to assess, whether the EU may have potential for successful handling of international crises, based on the case of Iranian nuclear programme. 

The international surroundings, emergence of new powers and new conflicts as well as the world economic crisis, have become a serious test for the EU and once again invigorated heated debates about its future as an international actor. European common foreign and security policy has often been criticized for lack of coherence and reluctance of Member States to drive these issues on supranational level. Indeed, it could hardly be argued, that the CFSP is other than intergovernmental. Yet, the EU is more and more seen as a single actor (though of ambiguous nature) and invests some efforts to form its perception as such. For demonstration of these attempts, the crisis management seems to be a perfect example, since, 

‘In order to reach serious external political actorhood, critically, Europe has to hold together in times of crises and tensions’. 

The Iranian case represents almost a unique example of successful handling of the international crisis by the EU. Three EU Member States have been part of the group of international negotiators with Iran and High Representative of the Union for Common Foreign and Security Policy was considered to be a head of this group. The EU demonstrated quite an attractive approach, combining sticks and carrots and adhering to diplomatic solution to the crisis, strongly opposing to military actions. Most importantly, key European powers managed to come up with a single, ‘European’ vision of the possible solution of the crisis and this consensus gave it additional weight in negotiations. 

The Iranian case is considered as a success also because the approach, Europeans pursued, has led to an agreement with Iran and at least for now, lessened the degree of tensions between the country and international community. It remains, however, doubtful, whether this success could be signed up to the European CFSP. 

In case of Iran, there had been several conditions, which made the EU participation more efficient: firstly, from the very beginning it had a mediator position between Iran and the US, which positively contributed to its perception in the Islamic State; secondly, due to the importance of the global issue (nuclear non-proliferation) the EU Member States managed to arrive to a unified position, which, in turn, allowed them to apply common coercive measures, and finally, these coercive measures were useful, since the EU did have close economic relations with Iran and, thus, ability to influence it by economic sanctions. The “European approach”, based on negotiations and coercive measures, worked out in Iranian case mainly, due to the above-mentioned reasons. 

Yet, the format of the EU participating in the negotiations should be of specific interest: in the EU3+3 the EU was presented by three member states on their own initiative, and by the EU foreign policy chief. Thus, it again could be spoken of a strong intergovernmental basis of EU common foreign policy, leading even to emerging of a triumvirate of countries as representatives of the EU and strengthening the role of the EU High Representative as a mediator, both between the EU3+3 participants and the EU member states as well. Unfortunately, it also means that EU common foreign and security policy is determined by the states and effective cooperation is possible only in the cases, when positions of key states are alike, or, at least, close. Then, Member States act together as a Union to make their position sound stronger, so there is no evidence of any further integration in CFSP, based on Iranian case. On the contrary, the form of leading triumvirate for handling foreign affairs signals, that so-called EU position is the position of three major states, and may rather encourage other actors to speak to these three capitals, than to Brussels. 

The EU obviously lacks coherence and military power to act as a traditional actor of international relations. The situation in Libya, besides the demonstration of the lack of coherence, once again proved its military weakness, though did not force the EU to contribute more to common defense and security policy. Yet the Member States, which are shaping the EU CFSP, are traditional actors and they are using the EU framework to amplify their capabilities. It could be said that the EU tries to be a traditional actor in a realist perception, but lacks resources and thus needs to find other ways to pursue its interests. Libya showed that separate military action is not an option for the EU, even as a measure of last resort, which is a serious limitation to its scope of actions. Here, the Iranian case presents an “other way” with severe economic sanctions as a biggest stick, and since this way worked out, it should not be denounced as completely ineffective. 

Iranian case is important because it demonstrated that despite all its shortcomings, all the problems the EU has acting together, it can achieve certain results even without deepening the integration in the sphere of CFSP. The European approach, uniting some common visions of European Member States about the crisis handling, demanded better cooperation, but not integration and thus, may be a way out of a dilemma between preservation of sovereignties and effectiveness. 

However, crisis management demands quick and unilateral actions and EU capabilities may not be enough for some situations since the EU often fails to come up with single positions (Iraq and Libya as examples), or to back up this position with some serious coercive measures – like in Ukraine. 

It may be further investigated, whether the European CFSP will continue to serve as an amplification of capabilities for the leading Member States and the triumvirate of France, the UK and Germany will keep its leading role in coming crises. The analysis of present and future crises may also note any changes to the EU line of action, assess its effectiveness and outline, whether the Union will be developing into a stronger crisis management actor, keeping the same internal structure of its CFSP, or the Iranian case will remain an exception. 































Sources and Bibliography

Sources

European Union (2012) ‘Consolidated version of the Treaty on European Union’. Official Journal of the European Union, C326/13, 26 October 2012. 

European Security Strategy (2003) ‘A Secure Europe in a Better World’. Brussels, 12 December. 

Report on the Implementation of the European Security Strategy (2008) ‘Providing Security in a changing World’. Brussels, 11 December, S407/08. 

The European Union Strategy against the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction (2008) ‘Effective multilateralism, prevention and international cooperation’. Council of the European Union, November 2008.

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of nuclear Weapons (NPT) (1968)

Basic Principles on the Use of Restrictive Measures (Sanctions) by Council of the European Union, Brussels, 7June 2004  URL: 

The United Nations Security Council resolutions # 1696 (2006), 1737(2006), 1747(2007), 1803(2008), 1835(2008), 1929(2010), 1984(2011), 2049(2012), 2105(2013). 

European Commission – Restrictive measures (sanctions) in force (Regulations based on Article 215 TFEU and Decisions adopted in the framework of the Common Foreign and Security Policy) (updated: 29.1.2014) URL:  

Speech by HR Catherine Ashton, at the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) Review Conference/ EU A 68/10 – New York, 3 May 2010

 EU Statement by Mr. Jacek Bylica Special Envoy for Non-proliferation and Disarmament European External Action Service – at the General Debate of the 68th Session of the UN General Assembly First Committee on 7th October 2013

Elements of a proposal to Iran as approved on 1 June 2006 at the meeting in Vienna of China, France, Germany, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and the European Union S202/06 – 2006 

Statement on Iran by EU High Representative Catherine Ashton on behalf of the E3/EU+3 (Brussels, 21 September 2011 A 369/11).

Remarks by EU High Representative Catherine Ashton following the meeting of E3+3 Foreign Ministers with the Iranian Foreign Minister/ New York, 26 September 2013, 130926/02

Remarks by EU High Representative Catherine Ashton following the meeting of the E3/EU+3 with Iran, 15/16 October 2013; Geneva, 16 October 2013, 131016/05

Fact sheet: The European Union and Iran/ Brussels, 14 October 2013, 131014/01

Joint plan of Action, Geneva 24 November 2013

Joint Statement by EU High Representative Catherine Ashton and Iran Foreign Minister Zarif,  Geneva, 24 November 2013

Speech by HR Catherine Ashton, at the League of Arab States/ A Commitment to Peace – the European Union and the Middle East/ Cairo, 15 March 2010/ EU A36/10

The Future of the United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent URL:  

 Lutte contre la prolifération nucléaire, Ministère des Affaires Etrangères de France. URL :http://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/fr/politique-etrangere-de-la-france/desarmement-et-non-proliferation/la-france-et-la-non-proliferation/article/lutte-contre-la-proliferation  

France TNP, Non-prolifération, premier axe : la réponse aux crises de prolifération. URL : http://www.francetnp.fr/spip.php?article23

Leading international efforts to resolve concerns about Iran’s nuclear programme. URL:  

Implementation of the Iran Nuclear Deal/ Testimony before the Joint Middle East and North Africa as well as Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade Subcommittee, January 28, 2014, The Honorable Mark D. Wallace URL: 

Monitoring and Verification in the Islamic Republic of Iran in relation to the Joint Plan of Action, report by the Director General, GOV/2014/2

Council Regulation of 20 January 2014 amending Regulation (EU) No 267/2012 concerning restrictive measures against Iran (2014/42/EU)  URL: 

Implementation of the Joint Plan of Action from November 24, 2013 in Geneva Between the P5+1 and The Islamic Republic of Iran and Provision of limited, Temporary, and Targeted Sanctions Relief, media note by Office of the Spokesperson, Washington DC, January 20, 2014 URL:  

François Hollande Conference de presse a l’issue du Conseil europeen 14 decembre 2012

URL:  /  

Europe’s Iran Diplomacy. European Union Center of North Carolina, EU Briefings, March 2008

The EU3 statement about Iran nuclear’s threat, 23 September 2005 

URL: 

Council of the European Union, Foreign Affairs, Luxembourg, 14 and 15 April 2014 Press Release URL:

Bibliography

Attinà, F., (2013) ‘Merging policies as strategy against emergency threats. The EU’s institutional response to disasters, risks and emergencies’. ReShape Online Papers Series, Paper no 01/13

Behr, T. (ed.) (2010) ‘Hard Choices. The EU’s options in a changing Middle East’. FIIA Report 28

Blockmans, S., Waizer S. (2013) ‘E3+3 coercive diplomacy towards Iran: Do the economic sanctions add up?’ CEPS, No. 292

Blockmans, S. (2012) ‘Beyond Entrenchment over Iran: Can the EU offer a framework for regional security?’ CEPS, 3 September 2012

Blockmans, S. (2013) ‘Curbing the circumvention of sanctions against Iran over its nuclear programme: Afrasiabi’. Common Market law Review, Vol. 50, No. 2 April 2013, PP.623-640

Blockmans, S., Kolarova, M. (2013) ‘Does the key to a WMD-free Middle East lie in a nuclear Iran?’ CEPS, 10 June 2013

Blockmans, S. (2013) ‘The EU’s External Action towards the Middle East: Resolution required’.  CEPS, 7 January 2013

Bretherton, C., Vogler, J., (2013) ‘A global actor past its peak?’ International relations 27 (3), pp.375-390

Caponetti, L., (2014) ‘European Union’s WMD Non-proliferation policy: the competence-sharing between EU institutions’, Reshape Project Paper no.7/14 – February 2014

Chelotti, N. (2013)‘ Analysing the Links between National Capitals and Brussels in EU foreign policy’. West European Politics, 36:5, 1052-1072, DOI: 10.1080/01402382.2013.799310 

Edwards, G., (2013) ‘The EU’s foreign policy and the search for effect’. International relations vol.27 no.3, pp.276-291

Emerson, M., Balfour, R., Corthaut, T., Wouters, J., Kaczyński P.M., Renard T. (2011) ‘Upgrading the EU’s Role as Global Actor’. CEPS, 25 January 2011

Emerson, M., Hollis, R., Naumkin, V., Riedel, B.  ‘Between Baghdad, Tehran, Riyadh and Jerusalem: Is there a way for the Greater Middle East?’ ESF Working paper No. 26, July 2007

Esfandiary, D. ‘Assessing the European Union Sanctions Policy: Iran as a Case Study’. EU Non-Proliferation Consortium, Non-Proliferation Papers No.34 December 2013

Everts, S. (2004) ‘Engaging Iran: A test case for EU foreign policy’. Centre for European Reform Working Paper, March 2004

Helwig, N., Ivan, P., Kostanyan, H. ()  ‘The New EU Foreign Policy Architecture: Reviewing the first two years of the EEAS’.  CEPS

Heisbourg, F., Clawson, P., Sazhin, V. ‘Iran. The Moment of Truth’. ESF Working Paper No.20, June 2005.

Hug, A. (ed.) ‘Europe in the world: Can EU foreign policy make an impact?’  Foreword by Rt. Hon. Douglas Alexander MP, The Foreign Policy Centre, 2013

Hyde-Price, A. (2006) ‘Normative’ power Europe: a realist critique’. Journal of European Public Policy, 13:2, 217-234, DOI: 10.1080/13501760500451634  

Kayhan, B., “Iran-EU Relations: time for restoring negotiations” Available at: 

Kienzle, B. (2013) ‘The role of ideas in EU responses to international crises: Comparing the cases of Iraq and Iran’. Cooperation and Conflict 48 (3) 424-443

Krotz, U. (2009) ‘Momentum and Impediments: Why Europe Won’t Emerge as a Full Political Actor on the World Stage Soon’. Journal of Common Market Studies, 2009 Volume 47. Number 3. pp.555-578

Larivé, M. (2014) ‘Debating European Security and Defense Policy. Understanding the Complexity’. Ashgate, 2014.

Mazzucelli, C. (2007) ‘EU3-Iranian Nuclear Diplomacy: Implications for US Policy in the Middle East’. EUMA Vol. 4 No. 

Mix, D.E. (2013) ‘The European Union: Foreign and Security Policy’. Congressional Research Service, April 8, 2013 

Mueller, P. ‘Europe’s Foreign policy and the Middle East Peace Process: The Construction of EU Actorness in Conflict Resolution’. Perspectives on European Politics and Society, vol.14, n.1, 2013, pp. 20-35

Niemann, A., Bretherton, C. (2013) ‘EU external policy at the crossroads: The challenge of actorness and effectiveness’. International relations vol.27 no.3 261-275

Pakfar, Sh. (2011) ‘Dealing with Iran: How can the EU achieve its strategic objectives?’ DIIS Report 2010:11

Pollack, M.A. ‘International Relations Theory and European Integration’.  Journal of Common Market Studies, June 2001, Vol. 39, No. 2, pp.221-44

Portela, C. (2004) The Role of the EU in the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons: The Way to Thessaloniki and Beyond. PRIF Reports No. 65

Posch, W. (2010) Iran and the European Union

Risi, C. ‘The Middle East as weapons of mass destruction free zone. A proposal to overcome the deadlock’. ReShape Online Papers Series, Paper no.6/13

Seeberg, P. (2009) ‘The EU as a realist actor in normative clothes: EU democracy promotion in Lebanon and the European Neighbourhood Policy’. Democratization, 16:1, pp.81-99, DOI: 10.1080/13510340802575858 

Seeberg, P. (2013) ‘The Iranian presidential election, EU sanctions and the regional perspectives’. Center for Mellemøststudier, February 2013

Shelala, R.M. II, Fite, B., Kasting, N. ‘US and Iranian Strategic competition: the impact of the EU, EU3, and non-EU European States’. Center for strategic and international studies/ Burke Chair in Strategy, April 4, 2013 

 Stavridis, S. and Fernández Sola N., ‘Conceptualizing the EU as an international actor after enlargement, constitutionalization and militarization’, University of Zaragosa, 2004 

Tocci, N.(2007) ‘Profiling Normative Foreign Policy: The European Union and its Global Partners’ CEPS Working Document No.279, December 2007

Wagner, W.(2003) ‘Why the EU’s common foreign and security policy will remain intergovernmental: a rationalist institutional choice analysis of European crisis management policy’. Journal of European Public Policy, 10:4, 676-595, DOI: 10.1080/1350176032000101262 

Walt, S.A. (1985) ‘Alliance Formation and the Balance of Power’. International Security, Vol.9 No.4 (Spring.1985), PP.3-43

Waltz, K.,(2012)  ‘Why Iran Should get the Bomb’, Foreign Affairs, July/August 2012 

Zielonka, J. (2011) ‘The EU as an International Actor: Unique or Ordinary?’ European Foreign Affairs Review 16: 281-301





