Abstract

This paper considers osculating algebraic curves of degree d of a
smooth curve in the projective plane RP 2. There is a wonderful Tait-
Kneser-like theorem for curves of degree 2. Also there is a similar
result for ovals of cubic curves, that was proven by S.Tabachnikov and
V.Timorin ([2]) . Our main goal is to prove a generalization of this
theorem for any degree d using methods of diﬀerential and projective
geometry.

1

Contents

Introduction

Main part

Deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Coordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The main problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Strategy of research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Conclusion

References

3

4
4
5
6
7
8

8

9

2

Introduction

The Tait-Kneser theorem was discovered by Peter Guthrie Tait ([3]) at the
end of the 19th century and rediscovered by Adolf Kneser early in the 20th
century. The theorem states the following:

Theorem 1. The osculating circles of an arc with a monotonic positive cur-
vature are pairwise disjoint and nested.

The proof is very simple. If A, B are any two points of an evolute, the
chord AB is the distance between the centers of the circles, and is necessarily
less than the arc AB, the diﬀerence of their radii.

There is whole series of similar theorems, here are some examples:
1. Taylor polynomials
Let f (x) be a smooth function of real variable. The Taylor polynomial
Tt(x) of degree n approximates f up to the n-th derivative. Then for an even
n:
Theorem 2. For any distinct a, b ∈ I, the graphs of the Taylor polynomials
Ta and Tb are disjoint over the whole real line.

2. Conics
Given a smooth curve γ in RP2 in each point we can draw an osculating
conic by taking one that passes through 5 inﬁnitesimally close points of γ.
This conic hyper-osculates if the tangency degree is more than 5, and such
point is called sextatic.

Theorem 3. The osculating conics of a curve, that is free from sextatic
points, are pairwise disjoint and nested.

3. Trigonometric polynomials
Assume that the osculating trigonometric polynomials of degree n for a

function f do nor hyper-osculate on an interval I ⊂ S1
Theorem 4. For any distinct a, b ∈ I, the graphs of the osculating trigono-
metric polynomials ga and gb are disjoint.

4. Cubic ovals
We can generalize the deﬁnition of an osculating conic to the deﬁnition
of an osculating algebraic curve of degree d. Then the point in which the
osculating curve hyper-osculates is called an extatic point

3

Theorem 5. Given a plane curve, osculated by ovals of cubic curves and
free from extatic points, the osculating ovals are disjoint and pairwise nested.

The aim of this paper is to ﬁnd some generalization of this fact for curves
of higher degree. It is worth noting that the fact that the curves are nested
is not true for curves of degree 4, or even for cubic curves that are not ovals.
Structure of the paper. The paper is divided into two sections. In the ﬁrst
of sections, there are set out the basic deﬁnitions, terms, and the methods
which are necessary to solve the problem stated below. In the second sec-
tion, there are brieﬂy described the approaches to the solution of the problem.

Keywords. Osculating curves, extatic points, integrable distributions of

planes.

Main Part

Deﬁnitions

As you can see from above the notion of osculation has some properties, that
are not yet generalized. The aim of this paper is to formulate an approach
to osculating curves, somehow generalize it and prove some results using it.
First we will need some generalized deﬁnitions.

Given a class of curves in RP2 A that has the next property: there exists
such n that through any n generic points you can draw exactly one curve
that belongs to A. This n is the freedom degree of the class A. For example
the freedom class of circles is 3, for lines it is two. It is not hard to prove,
that if A is the class of algebraic curves of degree d, than its freedom degree
is equal to d(d+3)
. Algebraic curves will be the main example that one should
keep in mind and our main result concerns them.

2

For a given smooth planar curve γ we can deﬁne the next objects:
Osculating curve: an osculating in a ∈ γ curve of class A is a curve γa ∈ A
that passes through n(A) inﬁnitesimally close to a points that lie on γ. Or,
in other words, it is a curve of class A that has the highest tangency degree
in a with γ.

Extatic point: a class A extatic point on curve γ is such a point in which
the osculating curve has a higher tangency degree than the freedom degree.
These deﬁnitions just generalize the notions given in the examples above.
Also there is an example that was not mentioned, which is the simplest one

4

possible. If A is the class of lines, than osculating lines are just the tangents
and extatic points are simply inﬂection points.

Working with these objects in RP2 is not always convenient, so we will

deﬁne a much bigger space X 1

A where we can see some properties.

X 1

A: X 1

A (or X 1

d for algebraic curves of degree d) is the space of A curves
with one marked point. It is convenient for us to disconnect the points of
simple intersection of these curves.
Now that we have deﬁned this space it is easy to understand, that given a
smooth planar parameterized curve γ(t) we can obtain a curve γ(cid:48)(t) ⊂ X 1
A by
taking the osculating curve in each point and marking the point of contact.
Although the family of curves we can obtain this way is large it has some
properties, that can be easily understood if we use right coordinates.

Coordinates

Generally X 1
A is a not smooth space, yet in most of the cases we are consid-
ering it will be smooth in almost every point, except the ones in which the
corresponding curve there is a singularity. In all other cases we can choose
a neighborhood, where all the curves in RP2 can be expanded into a Taylor
series locally around the marked point in some map with some chosen Eu-
clidian structure. Now, in the described area we can deﬁne coordinate maps
as follows:

(γ, a) ∈ X 1

d → (x, c0, c1 . . . cn−1),

where (x, c0) are the coordinates of a, and c1 . . . cn−1 are the Taylor coeﬃ-
cients of the curve γ in point a. Now we have some instruments that we can
use to understand local properties that the curve γ(cid:48) must satisfy. Mainly it
must touch the distributions of hyperplanes that are given by the following
forms (here n is the degree of freedom of A):
dc0 − c1dx = 0,
dc1 − c2dx = 0

...

dcn−2 − cn−1dx = 0

Which is equivalent to the fact that ci(cid:48) = ci+1 for any natural i. If in each
point of our space X 1
A we will intersect the corresponding hyperplanes we

5

will get a distribution of 2-dimensional planes (ω), that γ(cid:48) must touch. It is
important to mention, that although we described this object locally, in fact
ω is deﬁned in all non-singular points of X 1
A.

The main problem

This distribution that we just deﬁned is actually the main character of this
paper. Most of the results that were mentioned above can be reformulated in
terms of X 1
A and ω, but ﬁrst we need to understand what extaticity means in
these terms. Besides ω there is a ﬁeld of directions (v) in X 1
A that are tangent
to curves that we can obtain by moving the ﬁxed point without changing the
A, v(x) ⊂ ω(x).
A-curve that it lies on. Clearly for any non-singular x ∈ X 1
If x ∈ γ(cid:48) corresponds to an extatic point, then γ(cid:48) is tangent to v. This fact
obviously follows from the deﬁnitions of v and extatic points.

Now we can see that most of the theorems in the introduction can be
understood as properties of ω for diﬀerent A.
In all of the given cases it
means that that v uniformly divides the planes os ω into 2 half-planes, so
that for a curve γ(t) that is free from extatic points ˙γ(cid:48)(t) will all lie in
one half-plane in relation to v. For circles, conics, cubic ovals these are
the half-planes given by increasing and decreasing size, and for Taylor and
trigonometric polynomials they given by the ”level” of the curve (if ˙γ(cid:48)(t) lies
in one half-plane, then it increases, and vice versa).

Now we can see, that these theorems have a taste of Rolle’s theorem. We
will try to generalize them in some way. Firstly let us formulate a weaker
statement:

Hypothesis 6. For any class of curves A that satisﬁes our assumptions and
any smooth parameterized curve γ(t) ∈ RP2 if there exists 2 points t1 and
t2 for which the osculating A-curves coincide, than between there exists an
extatic point.

First of all I should say that this hypothesis is not true. A good and
simple example is the class of lines and the lima¸con. It is easy to see that
there is a double tangent, and two points of tangency, between which there
is no inﬂection point (if we go the long way around). To get a true version
of this hypothesis we need to reformulate it locally:

Theorem 7. For any class of curves A that satisﬁes our assumptions and
any point x in X 1
A, where the
prevois hypothesis is true.

A then, there is an open neighborhood in X 1

6

To proove this theorem we will use one fact: there exists an integrable
diﬀerential 1-form σ, such that there is a neighborhood of x, in which the
distribution of hyperplanes given by the form contains v in every point, but
is transversal ro ω. Also, there is neighborhood (probably smaller one) where
you can order the integral surfaces of σ. The further proof is simple: if we
have a curve γ(cid:48) whose ends lie on the same integral surface of σ (actually one
integral curve of v), then by Rolle’s theorem it is tangent to the destribution
in some point, hence by transversality of ω and σ in this point it is tangent
to v.

7

References

[1]

[2]

[3]

Ghys, E. (2007) Osculating curves. Talk at the ”Geometry and imagi-
nation” conference, Princeton. www.umpa.ens-lyon.fr/ ghys/articles/

Ghys, E. Tabachnikov, S. Timorin, V. Osculating curves: around
the Tait-Kneser Theorem. arXiv math.DG/1207.5662v1

Tait, P.G. (1896) Note on the circles of curvature of a plane curve.
Proc. Edinburgh Math. Soc. 14, 403.

8

