НАЦИОНАЛЬНЫЙ ИССЛЕДОВАТЕЛЬСКИЙ УНИВЕРСИТЕТ 

ВЫСШАЯ ШКОЛА ЭКОНОМИКИ 

Международный Институт Экономики и Финансов 

 

 

МАГИСТЕРСКАЯ ДИССЕРТАЦИЯ 

по образовательной программе высшего профессионального образования, 

направление 080100.68 Экономика 

 

на тему: 

Political Connections and Firm Performance  

  

 

Студент второго курса магистратуры 

 Новокшонов Антон Андреевич 

 

Научный руководитель 

Шпренгер Карстен 

PhD Economics, доцент 

 

МОСКВА,  2013 год 

 

     1 

 

 

 

 

Аннотация  

 

Дипломная  работа  “Влияние  присутствия  членов  Правительства  в  Правлении 

компании  на  деятельность  компании”  исследует  современные  политические  связи  между 

правительственными  органами  и  корпоративными  компаниями  частного  сектора.  В  работе 

проанализировано  влияние  на  результаты  деятельности  компании  наличия  тесной  связи  с 

высшими государственными органами власти.  

 

В  процессе  исследования  была  собрана  база  данных  по  бывшим  и  нынешним  членам 

Федеральных  государственных  органов  и  ведущим  менеджерам  и  директорам,  входящим  в 

Советы  Директоров  и  Правлении  компаний.  Общее  число  выборки  составило  5199 

государственных  деятелей  и  1011  директоров  корпоративного  сектора  экономики.  На  ее 

основе  были  найдены  директора  компаний,  руководящие  компанией  и  занимавшие  в 

прошлом  или  занимающие  государственные  должности.  Такие  компании  определены  как 

“политически связанные”. 

 

В  работе  используется  предпосылка  о  том,  что  близкая  связь  с  государственными 

органами  позволяет  компании  получать  определенные  выгоды  от  этой  связи.  На  ее  основе, 

автором  выдвигается  гипотеза,  что  назначение  политического  деятеля  из  Высших 

государственных  органов  власти  в  руководство  компании  воспринимается  рынком  как 

положительный сигнал и ведет к краткосрочному увеличению стоимости акций. 

 

В  исследовании  используется  эконометрическая  методология  изучения  событий. 

Совокупные доходности сверх нормы в течение периода около даты назначения тестируются 

на статистическое отличие от показателей нормальных доходностей. Параметрические тесты 

подтверждают положительный результат, однако, дальнейший анализ выявил нежелательные 

характеристики  данных  доходностей.  Доходности  акций  в  рассматриваемом  периоде  не 

соответствуют  нормальному  распределению,  поэтому  альтернативные  применяются 

непараметрические  тесты.  Результаты  данных  тестов  не  подтверждают  сформулированную 

гипотезу.  

 

Результаты данного исследования были смещены в силу ограниченности информации 

и  сокрытия  реальных  взаимоотношений  между  представителями  крупнейших  корпораций  и 

политической  государственной  элитой.  Данная  область  требует  дальнейшего  изучения,  что 

возможно исключительно при увеличении прозрачности бизнеса в Российской Федерации. 

     2 

 

Abstract 

In  the  paper  I  demonstrate  the  presence  of  political  connections  on  Russian  market.  Own 

collected database and improved definitions of political connections are implemented to establish the 

political  ties  of  the  largest  Russian  public  companies.  The  short-term  performance  implications  of 

these connections are derived by performing ex-ante event study’s methodology around the date of 

nomination  of  politically  connected  representative  to  a  firm.  The  research  provides  insight  on  the 

performance measurement topic in particular country in financial economics.  

 

 

 

     3 

Contents 

Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 5 

Literature review ................................................................................................................................... 8 

Definition of political connections ...................................................................................................... 15 

Data and methodology ........................................................................................................................ 18 

Model and descriptive statistic............................................................................................................ 24 

Results ................................................................................................................................................. 29 

Conclusion .......................................................................................................................................... 36 

References ........................................................................................................................................... 38 

Appendix ............................................................................................................................................. 42 

 

 

 

 

 

 

     4 

Introduction 

Firms  deal  with  a  multiple  economic  agents  such  as  suppliers  and  customers,  other  market 

players and competitors, regulators and governments in a variety of operations (Granovetter, 1985). 

The  interactions  between  corporate  and  governmental  sectors  play  an  important  role  in  business 

environment  and  strategy  in  modern  economics  (Hillman  et  al.  2004).  It  is  impossible  and 

unreasonable  to  explore  economy  in  the  isolation  from  politics.  Recent  studies  showed  that 

politically  connected  firms  are  widely  spread  globally  and  attract  more  attention  in  scientific 

literature nowadays (Faccio, 2006).  

Large number of research papers in different  fields of science is  dedicated to  exploring the 

relationships between the companies and the public workers. The authors set up the question: “Does 

the presence of political connection help a company to perform better?” They are searching for  the 

answer  on  the  local  markets,  implementing  specific  methodologies  within  separate  countries,  like 

Indonesia (Fisman, 2001), Malaysia (Johnson and Mitton, 2003), China (Wu et al. 2012), the USA 

(Jayachandran, 2006) and others; or globally, trying to derive common characteristics of politically 

connected firms in a global context (Faccio, 2006; Faccio et al. 2006). 

It is a controversial issue to state that connected companies exploit “political capital” and are 

preferential  for  investor  choices.  Not  all  researchers  derive  evidences  of  connections  being 

advantageous. Recent studies, for instance, tend to express doubts in positive effects of being close 

to  government  (Hersch  et  al.  2008;  Aggarwal  et  al.  2012);  while  some  earlier  ones  support  them 

(Fisman, 2001; Jayachandran, 2006). Thus, the issue requires additional research. 

Russia is not a random choice for the research. Political life is a social and actively debated 

question  in  Russia.  Concealment  of  ownership  and  real  incomes  of  political  elite  and  their 

relationships with business is covered with mystery.  

Evidences  on  connections  tend  to  be  stronger  in  countries  with  higher  level  of  corruption 

(Faccio,  2006).  Transparency  International  organization  ranked  Russia  on  133rd  place  of  total  174 

countries  in  corruption  level  in  20121.  This  is  the  worst  result  out  of  top  20  developed  countries. 

                                                           
1 http://rating.rbc.ru/article.shtml?2012/12/14/33843988 

 

     5 

Another organization  - World Justice Project  – ranked Russia 85th out  of 97 in  Rule of Law  Index 

ranking2.  

Lack of research data on this topic is a challenge for the thesis paper and it should also be a 

valuable contribution to the research literature. 

In  my  thesis  paper  I  discuss  circumstances,  current  situation  and  outcomes  of  connections 

between corporate businesses and the political governmental elite in Russia.  

Two main objectives of the research are defined:  

  Prepare a thorough analysis of situation around political connections in Russia;  

  Model the effects of connections on a companies’ performance by event study methodology. 

In order to achieve the objectives I collected new data set of companies and revised it to find 

out the presence of connections.  

Two  hundred  largest  companies  by  market  capitalization  criterion  were  the  starting  point. 

Firms’  final  beneficiaries  were  defined  and  state-owned  companies  were  excluded.  Database  of 

former  and  current  members  of  Federal  Assembly  of  the  Russian  Federation,  Government  of  the 

Russian Federation, Presidential Office and the other Committees  was collected. For the remaining 

privately-owned companies in  a dataset  the definition of political  connection was implied.  Finally, 

event  study’s  methodology  was  implemented  to  derive  if  stocks  demonstrated  abnormal  returns 

around the nomination date.  

The  procedure  implied  doesn’t  support  expected  results.  Parametric  tests  should  be 

considered  with  concern  due  to  bad  assumptions.  Following  prescribed  methodologies  in  research 

literature I checked the normality of stock returns and reject the null hypothesis being normal. Non-

parametric  tests  relax  the  assumption  of  stock  returns  normality.  I  imply  several  commonly  used 

specifications. They conclude that the event of interest has no influence on stock performance. Test 

criteria  failed  to  reject  the  hull  of  cumulative  abnormal  returns  being  zero.  I  discussed  possible 

biases and test weaknesses due to data limitations.  

My thesis paper contributes to finance literature in several ways.  

                                                           
2 http://worldjusticeproject.org/rule-of-law-index 

 

     6 

First  of  all,  it  enriches  the  literature  on  political  connections.  I  improved  the  definition  of 

politically  connected  firms  and  enlarged  the  sample  to  distinguish  connections.  In  particular,  I 

reviewed  all  the  members  of  Board  of  Directors  and  Board  of  Management  of  every  company  to 

identify the presence of connections. This modification allowed me to get more relevant sample of 

political connections and develop the identification process more thoroughly.  

Secondly, thesis paper adds insight on the problem in particular regions – Russia and Russian 

market.  Though,  the  presence  of  government  directors  in  corporate  Boards  is  broadly  presented  in 

Russia, the topic attracts little attention. Faccio (2006), Frye and Iwasaki (2011), Dolgopyatova et al 

(2009), Yakovlev et al. (2010) implicitly discuss related topics. In particular, Faccio (2006) included 

Russia  in  her  47  countries  analyses,  but  the  market  was  not  analyzed  deeply  (only  25  companies 

under investigation). Frye and Iwasaki (2011) used dividend payments as the long term indicator of 

firm performance to measure the effect of political ties. Dolgopyatova et al. (2009), Yakovlev et al. 

(2010) demonstrated detailed characteristics of corporate governance issues in Russian economy.  

I expected the results to be positive for the event of interest. However, the result doesn’t go 

along the researches that evidence political connections have positive effect on company’s value in 

short-term horizon as it was expected.  

The  remaining  thesis  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  2  shows  in  details  the  existing 

literature  on  the  topic.  Section  3  provides  definition  specification  and  theoretical  methodology. 

Section  4  describes  data  and  descriptive  statistics.  Section  5  reports  empirical  results.  Section  6 

concludes. 

 

 

 

     7 

Literature review 

A  numerous  number  of  research  papers  on  corporate-government  relationships  exist  in 

academic  literature.  Political  science,  economics,  sociology,  management  and  financial  studies 

contribute  to  the  development  of  the  topic.  This  part  of  the  thesis  paper  categorizes  existing 

literature, utilized methods and tested hypothesis. It also explains the rationale behind the choice of 

the topic and implied procedures of thesis paper.  

The review is structured as follows: brief description of sciences and theoretical concepts on 

the topic is given. This part is extremely important, since the techniques and concepts differ among 

earlier  and  later  researches.  Recent  papers  on  financial  economics  will  be  discussed  after  that. 

Review ends up with the explanation of potential improvements and caveats of the thesis.  

Early  researches  relate  to  corporate  political  action  literature  (CPA).  It  supports  the  idea  of 

increase of corporate activity in political sector and describes the variety of activities implemented. 

Theoretical  frameworks  emphasize  the  reasons  to  become  politically  involved  and  strategies  to 

establish  the  connection  (Schuler  et  al.  2002).    Evidence  concludes  that  nurturing  political 

connections is an essential element of corporate policy strategy (Baysinger, 1984).  

Theoretical concepts behind the topic are categorized and presented in Table 1.  

Field of study  Key theories 

Political 
science 

Economics 

Interest group theory 
Government  public  policy  is  responsible  for  presenting  and  preserving 
interests  of  the  whole  society.  Businesses  form  groups  of  alike  interests  to 
lobby  and  protect  their  favors.  Competition  between  groups  motivates 
companies to be politically connected  
Limitations 
The theory lacks the explanation of benefits and doesn’t reflect reality properly 
Source 
Mundo,1992; Plotke,1992 

Collective action theory 
“Political  good”  has  similar  properties  with  collective  goods.  In  small  or 
highly  concentrated  sectors/industries  there  are  no  place  for  free  riders,  so 
participants are active. In large markets the amount of participants is high, so 
some of them might “free ride” on donations of others 
Limitations 
The  theory  doesn’t  take  into  account  several  aspects,  for  instance,  specific 
industry characteristics, country differences, and other 

 

     8 

Source 
Keim and Zeithaml,1986 

Public choice theory 
Corporate-political sector relationships form an “exotic” type of market. Public 
services  represent  supply  side.  Corporate  companies  are  consumers  of  public 
services. The price is considered to be the amount of money or other resources 
delegated  to  establish  desired  political  circumstances  in  economy.  Based  on 
the expectations of public workers behavior companies vary their contribution 
trying to optimize the degree of participation 
Limitations 
Expectations matter a lot. When theory is inefficient, when public workers do 
not  completely  represent  interests  of  its  supporters.  The  price  paid  doesn’t 
always  reflect  the  purchased  service.  The  practical  value  of  the  theory  is 
significantly limited 
Source 
Grier and Munger,1993 

Transaction cost theory 
The theory developed by Olivier Williamson represents institutional approach 
in  economy.  It  states  that  the  company  acts  in  most  possibly  rational  way 
aiming 
to  minimize 
transaction  costs  coming  from  participating/non 
participating in politics 
Limitations 
Public  policy  value  estimation  when  acting  in  a  coalition  with  other  less 
similar firms is not possible 
Source 
Williamson,1985 

Game theory 
Company’s actions are based on expectations about the actions of other market 
players and public policy makers. The model of two companies competing for 
public influence is introduced  
Limitations 
Competitor’s behavior is overestimated in final decision making process 
Source: 
Austen-Smith and Wright,1996 

Resource dependence theory 
Economic  agents  are  considered  to  be  interdependent  from  each  other’s 
decisions (in particular, from policymakers). This dependence is considered to 
be  negative.  Successful  corporate  political  strategy  reduces  the  degree  of 
dependence as well as the level of uncertainty 
Limitations 
The assumptions do not distinguish between companies with different specific 
firm characteristics 
Source 

     9 

 

 

 

Sociology 

 

 

Baysinger,1984 

Institutional theory 
Institutional  theory  suggests  that  a  company  participates  in  political  life  to 
acquire  and  maintain  “political  capital”  –  nonmaterial  resource  (network  in 
government  structures,  knowledge  of  law,  governmental  projects)  that  might 
be transformed into material advantage 
Limitations 
It  is  hard  to  separate  and  measure  political  capital  within  regular  terms  of 
business due to its non-materiality 
Source 
Oberman,1993  

Management  Agency theory 

The  interactions  between  government  and  corporate  sector  represent  agent-
principal  relationship.  Firms  are  active 
in  establishing  public  sector 
relationships in order to control agents – government; 
Limitations 
Entering  politics  will  not  completely  secure  a  firm  from  unfavorable  agent’s 
behavior 
Source 
Keim and Baysinger,1993  

The key takeaways of the initial theories on political connections are: 

Table 1. Review of theoretical concepts 

  earlier papers explain the rationale behind political connections; 

  authors tend to ask what policy strategy could be imposed; 

 

theories conclude that close relationships with government have value for a company. 

The assumptions  of thesis paper are based on foundations of the described theories. Recent 

researches  on  Russian  market  support  the  theory  that  connections  have  value  for  a  firm  as  well  as 

government. Government allows collecting rents from companies for a group of politicians, instead 

guaranteeing  their  support.  Companies’  performance  increases  due  to  availability  of  additional 

resources within preferential governmental treatment (Frye and  Iwasaki, 2011). Also, the results of 

the thesis paper provide support for positive nature of connections. 

Measurement and quantitative estimation of the effects performing political actions remained 

unexplored till then. Basically, recent  financial economics literature focuses on particular occasion 

on the market that relates closely to political life and scrutinizes it in more detail. The effect of this 

event on the company’s performance is derived.  

 

     10 

Let’s  categorize  and  structure  the  academic  literature  on  topic  by  hypotheses  tested, 

methodology used and the market of the research. 

1.  Hypotheses tested 

Researchers  used  many  different  types  of  hypotheses  in  recent  literature  and  some  of  them 

might  be  surprising.  Three  most  common  directions  are  related  to  stock  prices  fluctuations  after 

political events, preferential treatment when searching for extra capital and benefits from regulatory 

easing. 

  Stock  prices  are  affected  by  the  presence  of  political  connection  (Jayachandran,  2006; 

Fisman, 2001)  

Stock  price  fluctuations  caused  by  an  event  is  a  popular  approach  to  measure  political 

influence.  

Sudden  switch  in  May  2001  in  Senate  power  from  republicans  to  democrats  caused  by 

Vermont senator James Jeffords’ departure from the Republican Party was followed by a fluctuation 

in  an  amount  of  97  billion  dollars  in  the  market  capitalization  of  500  largest  US  companies 

(Jayachandran,  2006).    Jeffords  effect’s  results  were  positive  (0,5%  increase)  for  ones  companies, 

since they were supporting democrats, while they were negative (-1% decrease) for those, supporting 

republicans.  This  fact  provides  strong  evidence  that  the  values  of  a  firm  are  correlated  with 

unexpected  political  events  and  the  ruling  party.  Standard  event  study’s  methodology  was  used 

around the date of retirement. 

  Capital structure of the firm differs among connected and unconnected firms (Faccio, et al. 

2006; Claessens et al. 2008; Khawaja and Mian, 2005) 

Faccio  et  al.  provide  evidence  that  politically  connected  companies  are  perceived  by 

investors and banks as more preferred borrowers compared to unconnected firms. The reason for that 

is that investors believe politically connected firms will get significant bailouts from government in 

case  of  default.  This  motivates  lenders  to  finance  such  companies  more  actively.  That  is  why  the 

leverage ratio of politically connected companies tends to be larger. 

State-owned banks grand advantageous access to long-term financing to politically connected 

companies  in  Brazil  (Claessens  et  al.  2008).  This  tendency  was  also  evident  in  Pakistan  (Khawaja 

and Mian, 2005). 

 

     11 

  Connected firms exploit regulatory benefits (Charumulind et al. 2006) 

Banks  allowed  providing  less  collateral  for  politically  connected  companies  to  obtain  more 

long-term financing in Thailand, than for unconnected firms (Charumulind et al. 2006) 

Methodology used 

The  most  commonly  used  methodological  approach  in  empirical  research  on  the  topic  is 

event  studies.  It  is  used  on  ex-ante  basis,  meaning  that  the  prices  of  stocks  are  known  around  the 

required date. It allows pricing the effect of government connection as a signal on political occasion 

of concern around its date.  

The main hypothesis of the thesis paper is stated as follows:  

Nomination of politically connected director or manager is considered as a positive signal 

for investor and leads to stock price increase around the date of announcement.  

The hypothesis is tested and cumulative abnormal returns explicitly represent the measure of 

influence of connection on company’s performance. As shown, the implemented tools are commonly 

approved and widely used. Several papers exist that use the same techniques of estimating the effects 

of  different  events  on  firm’s  market  capitalization  around  nomination  date  (Jayachandran,  2006; 

Fisman, 2001; Cooper et al. 2010). 

Some  recent  studies  tend  to  prove  the  indifferent  or  even  negative  effects  of  political 

connections on company’s performance.  

Aggarwal  et  al.  (2012)  exploit  agency  conflict  idea.  Theoretically,  firms  are  willing  to 

perform  political  actions  trying  to  support  the  public  workers  that  offer  them  desired  legislative, 

economic or other conditions. That might result in positive response on firm’s performance. On the 

other  side,  management  pursuing  own  goals  might  be  the  initiator  of  these  political  involvement. 

That leads to complicating agent’s problem for shareholders and negative performance expectations. 

During 1991 – 2004 periods in USA the authors analyzed donations trying to separate two effects. 

They conclude that donations negatively affect the returns of the firm. “Worse corporate governance 

is associated with larger donations. A $10,000 increase in donations is associated with a reduction in 

annual excess returns of 7.4 basis points” (Aggarwal et al. 2012, Abstract). 

 

     12 

The  effects  of  being  politically  connected  are  difficult  to  materialize.  However,  they  have 

value as previous analysis shows. It concludes that they might be considered as a sort of intangible 

assets. This assumption forced Hersch et al. (2008) to apply Tobin q measure to estimate the value of 

the connection. “If political  capital  exists, it is  an intangible  asset.  However, we find little relation 

between  q  and  political  contributions,  suggesting  that  campaign  contributions  may  not  have  long 

term effects on political markets” (Hersch et al. 2008, p. 396). 

Geographical differences 

The vast majority of the literature covers separate countries individually. Literature explores 

different markets in developed and developing countries.  

There are differences in  techniques used.  In developed countries, like USA, UK, Japan, the 

information  on  elections  and  procedures  of  accounting  disclosure  is  highly  prescribed  what  allows 

researchers to build a reliable database. For instance, Cooper et al. (2010) were able to collect data 

on 25 years long period in the US elections and contributions.  

Developing  countries  attract  researchers  of  the  topic  because  of  other  reasons.  They  are 

relatively higher role of government as an economic player (Wu et al. 2012), presence of patronage 

and informal relationships (Charumulind et al. 2006). In particular, many researchers choose Brazil 

as the most suitable market to analyze different issues related to political connections.  Government 

plays  an  important  role  in  economic  development  in  Brazil;  "political  institutions  favor 

particularistic relationship between politicians and firms" (Bandeira-de-Mello and Marcon, 2008, p. 1).  

The  literature  on  Russian  market  is  limited.  However,  the  market  is  a  good  choice  for 

analyzing political connections.  

Yakovlev et  al  (2010) provide evidence on the specific features of corporate  governance in 

Russia.  They  state  that  Russian  market  is  characterized  by  high  “concentration  of  ownership  and 

control, rapid pace of corporate integration (with integrated business groups dominating the Russian 

economy)  and  tendency  to  “personify”  Russian  business”  (Yakovlev  et  al.  2010,  p.  131).  Authors 

present  two  model  of  corporate  governance,  where  one  is  for  large  companies  and  corporations. 

Such companies tend to use close informal ties with other market and public players. Based on these 

specifications, I believe that largest public companies dataset has the best fit for the analyses.  

 

     13 

Political  elite  has  enormous  power  in  the  country.  Weak  law  system,  concealment  of 

ownership  and  real  incomes  of  politicians,  high  level  of  corruption  are  key  features  of  Russian 

economy  (Transparency  International;  World  Justice  Project).  It  is  relevant,  since  the  number  of 

political  connections  tend  to  grow  in  countries  with  higher  level  of  corruption  and  weaker 

regularities (Faccio, 2006).  

Frye  and  Iwasaki  (2011)  provided 

theoretical  description  of  business–government 

relationships  in  Russian economy. They differentiated three categories of  relationships:  managerial 

discipline,  rent-extraction  ideal  type  and  “collusion”  type.  Using  the  survey  of  Hitotsubashi 

University  and  the  Higher  School  of  Economics  of  2005,  they  concluded  that  the  most  common 

format  of  relationships  is  a  “collusion  type”.  It  happens  when  a  state  representative  governs  the 

corporate firm, which tends to have relative high performance. Such appointment allows the state to 

control  the  firm  and  benefit  from  it  (like  in  rent-extraction  type)  and  also  to  stimulate  its 

performance  (like  in  managerial  discipline).  This  conclusion  confirms  the  literature  on  positive 

effects of political connections.  

In  the  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  point  out  potential  improvements  and  critics  of  the 

research. Firstly due to implied procedures the performance implication effects are considered to be 

short-term. However, it would be useful to perform additional research on longer terms implications 

of the political connections. Secondly, the research might be improved by controlling for changes in 

Board of Directors and  Board of Management.  The implemented procedure uses fixed time period 

dataset  of  Boards  member  –  the  ones  that  were  heading  companies  at  the  beginning  of  2012.  The 

changes  in  Boards  member  in  previous  years  might  also  be  considered  as  political  connections. 

Finally,  inclusion  of  public  service  structures  on  regional  level  might  help  to  find  out  other 

connections. 

 

 

     14 

Definition of political connections 

Several  patterns  exist  in  the  research  literature  to  identify  whether  the  firm  is  politically 

connected or not.  

One  participation  method  allows  identifying  the  political  connection  when  the  company  is 

supporting  or  sponsoring  the  nomination  of  a  particular  candidate  or  a  party  in  the  elections.  It  is 

done indirectly, without nomination of firm’s own representative. Firms donate soft or hard money 

or other resources to political parties or candidates during election times (Claessens et. al. 2008). 

Another  participation  method  occurs  when  the  company’s  representative  (most  commonly 

from  top  management  or  directors)  directly  offers  his  candidacy  for  election  in  the  country.  By 

succeeding in elections, the representative will gain an official public position and a firm he will be 

working for will be defined as politically connected one. If he fails then the firm will remain being 

unconnected.  

A company is searching for possibilities of exploiting benefits from political connections and 

nominates its own representative and supports public workers, who represent favorable interests of 

the  companies.  It  is  possible  to  identify  when  and  what  firms  were  willing  to  gain  political 

connections by collecting the elections and candidates’ data 

It  might  be  the  case,  when  the  directors  or  managers  are  personally  related  to  some  public 

officer.  This  method  is  called  social  network  approach.  The  key  idea  behind  the  social  network 

approach is that a “firm is connected to a politician if one of its directors shares the same educational 

background with a politician” (Do et al. 2011, p. 1) 

Methods  described  above  are  highly  instructive.  These  methods  allow  understanding  of 

nature  of  connection.  It  means  that  it  explains  why,  when  and  at  what  circumstances  the  firm  got 

connected.  The  key  drawback  of  these  methods  is  a  difficulty  of  implementation.  They  are  most 

commonly  used  for  analyses  of  developed  countries,  where  the  political  system  is  mature;  the 

elections are highly prescribed and completely transparent.  

Finally,  a  current  director  or  manager  might  be  a  previous  public  worker.  It  is  called  firm 

representatives’ method and is commonly used in many researches (for instance, Faccio, 2006). 

 

     15 

The  firm  representatives’  method  is  a  cross-sectional  method  of  political  connections 

identification.  It  assumes  that  in  particular  point  of  time  a  sample  of  firms  by  whatever  criteria  is 

gathered.  Then  a  company  is  inspected  if  it  is  connected  through  its  representatives.  It  is  so  if  the 

representatives  (such  as  directors  or  managers)  are  political  workers  and  also  simultaneously  are 

holding a public place. It is often the case when they are not political workers in a moment, but were 

earlier,  before  being  appointed  to  the  company.  This  is  also  a  criterion  for  connection,  because 

previous public experience is also relevant and might give preferences to a company.  

The  advantage  of  the  method  is  its  relative  simplicity  comparing  to  direct  or  indirect 

participation methods. However, there are several drawbacks. It assumes specific point of time when 

a  cross-section  company’s  data  is  gathered.  It  might  be  the  case  when  the  company  was  already 

previously  connected  and  have  sustainable  governmental  relationship,  but  there  are  no  direct 

representatives in a firm’s Boards at this particular point of time. Another issue is that we don’t get 

the  reason  and  circumstances  when  the  firm  became  connected.  This  methodology  is  more 

commonly  used  in  developing  countries  since  less  information  about  the  politics  and  elections  is 

disclosed.  

In my thesis paper firm representatives’ method is implemented.  

The  definition  used  is  based  on  the  identification  procedure  introduced  by  Mara  Faccio 

(2006). She used two main criteria to identify the political connection: “at least one of its top officers 

(CEO,  president,  vice-president,  chairman,  or  secretary)  or  large  shareholder  is  a  member  of 

parliament, a minister, or is closely related to a top politician or party. Close relationships include: 

(i)  friendship,  (ii)  former  heads  of  state  or  prime  ministers  (and  their  relatives),  (iii)  directorships 

covered  by  current  politicians  in  1997,  who  recently  left  the  firm,  (iv)  connections  with  foreign 

politicians, and (v) well known cases of relationships with political parties” (Faccio, 2006, p. 371). 

Some  degree  of  subjectivity  exists  in  the  criterion  of  close  relationship,  when  considering 

friendship and connections with former politicians.  

I  improved  the  criteria  of  political  connections  in  order  to  get  more  relevant  and  suitable 

results.  Instead  of  four  of  top  officers’  positions,  I  implied  the  criterion  to  the  full  composition  of 

Board of Management and Board of Directors.  

 

     16 

I  also  introduced the time frame of the definition.  I  added not  only the current  members of 

governmental  authorities,  but  also  the  former  ones.  Time  period  used  is  1991  till  nowadays.  More 

details on that are in the next part of thesis. 

Finally, I would formulate the definition in the following way: 

The company is defined as politically connected if: 

  It is a privately-owned company; 

  At least one of its final beneficiaries or a member of Board of Directors or Board of Directors 

is a previous or current minister or member of a parliament. 

 

 

 

     17 

Data and methodology 

Due  to  limitations  of  reliable  databases  on  Russian  market,  a  new  database  was  created. 

Creating  own  database  has  several  challenging  problems;  however,  a  number  of  assumptions  was 

implied that aimed to make the analysis consistent and complete. 

In  response  to  the  defined  objective  and  chosen  method  –  to  estimate  the  share  price 

fluctuation around announcement date – the first limitation on data was stated.  

Assumption 1: The database consists only of public companies 

The most reliable dataset  of public Russian companies is  published by RA Expert Ranking 

Agency. Top-200 companies by market  capitalization criterion  for the 2012  year end compiled the 

initial database. According to RA Expert estimates, the total capitalization of 200 largest companies 

comprises  743  billion  dollars3.  According  to  RIA  Rating,  total  market  capitalization  of  the  second 

hundred of companies compose only 1,5% of the total value of the first hundred companies4. Own 

calculation  based  on  RA  Expert  data  shows  this  ratio  is  equal  to  1,7%.  Assuming  that  there  are 

several  differences  between  RA  Expert  and  RIA  Rating  ratings,  but  they  do  not  distort  the  figures 

significantly, it might be concluded that 200 companies compound almost the whole Russian market 

of public companies.  

The  analyzed  sample  includes  both  state-owned  and  private-owned  companies.  As  stated 

above  the  goal  of  the  model  is  to  distinguish  whether  the  designation  of  a  politically  connected 

director  is  a  positive  signal  on  the  stock  market.  State-owned  companies  are  by  definition  closely 

politically  connected,  so  they  are  out  of  interest.  For  such  companies  the  nomination  of  a  public 

worker to a director position will not gain extra value, since it is state-owned. In order to properly 

estimate the impact of a designation, the beginning sample must contain only private-owned firms. 

Assumption 2: State-owned companies are excluded from the sample 

Two filters are used to identify the state-ownership. The first filter is when the state possesses 

at  least  10%  share  of  stocks  of  the  company.  By  implying  this  criterion  on  a  sample  of  200 

companies, 28 companies were excluded.  

                                                           
3 http://www.raexpert.ru/ratings/expert400/2012/part03/p08/ 
4 http://riarating.ru/corporate_sector_study/20130204/610537465.html 

 

     18 

The  second  filter  is  implemented  for  the  companies  whose  primary  or  further  shareholders 

are state-owned companies. It occurs quite often when a company is owned by state not directly, but 

through  other  state-owned  structures.  In  order  to  identify  these  relationships,  I  traced  the 

shareholders one by one in order to find the final beneficiaries of each firm. If the final beneficiary 

was a state-owned company, then the explored company was also defined as politically connected. 

For  instance,  let’s  take  a  look  at  Rostelecom.  Federal  Agency  for  State  Property  Management 

(FASM) owns only 7% of the company directly. By the first filter, the criterion is not met. Implying 

the second filter, I found out that the largest shareholder of Rostelecom is Svyazinvest, a fully state-

owned company. State ownership is detected through one additional chain link.  

Two  filters  are  used  in  order  to  be  as  much  restrictive  as  possible.  A  company  might  have 

strong  connection  with  government  through  its  beneficiary  and  this  will  distort  the  results.  It  is 

assumed that even in this case the state will want to offer own director or manager to the company. 

By implying this criterion 51 companies were excluded. Finally, the sample consisted of 121 

private-owned companies.  

Quarterly reports (1Q 2013) and list  of affiliates (1Q 2013) provided the  information  about 

the  beneficiaries.  It  was  a  challenging  task  to  find  out  the  final  beneficiaries,  because  they  are  not 

willing to be disclosed.  

Cyprus  is  the  largest  country  by  the  amount  of  investments  in  Russia.  It  is  partially  so, 

because  the  owners  of  the  largest  Russian  companies  are  Cyprus-registered  firms.  Another 

jurisdiction  allows  the  owner  of  such  companies  being  disguised.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons,  why 

management has large shares of firms through several offshore artificial companies. 

The next step was to identify the political connections.  

According  to  the  definition,  the  dataset  of  Board  of  Directors  and  Board  of  Managers 

members  is  needed.  Quarterly  reports  (1Q  2013)  and  list  of  affiliates  (1Q  2013)  provided  the 

information about the Board of Directors and Board of Managers members. This dataset composed 

of 1011 current members of Board of Directors and Board of Management.  

Federal Assembly of Russian Federation database 

Dataset of former and current members of Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation was 

collected. Federal Assembly consists of State Duma and Federal Council. 

 

     19 

Six convocations of State Duma were operating since 1991. The current one consists of 450 

people,  while  the  former  ones  include  a  bit  less.  It  is  being  reelected  every  4  years.  Totally,  it 

compounded of 2853 persons. The data was found on official site of State Duma5. 

First  convocation of Federal  Council was initiated in  1994. Four periods of formation  were 

established since then. I collected data on all members during that time period. Nowadays, Federal 

Council consists of 166 federal Councilors. 

In  order  to  make  the  research  more  consistent  I  added  current  members  of  all  related 

Committees, which included Chamber of the council, Chairman and Deputy Chairman. Members of 

10 committees were included: 

  The Council of the  Federation Committee on Constitutional  Legislation, Legal  and Judicial 

Affairs and Civil Society Development; 

  The Council of the Federation Committee on the Federal Structure, Regional Policies, Local 

Self-Governance and Affairs of the North; 

  The Council of the Federation Committee on Defense and Security; 

  The Council of the Federation Committee for Foreign Affairs; 

  The Council of the Federation Budget and Financial Markets Committee; 

  The Council of the Federation Committee on Economic Policy; 

  The Council of the Federation Committee for Agrarian and Food Policy and Environmental 

Management; 

  The Council of the Federation Committee on Social Policy; 

  The  Council  of  the  Federation  Committee  on  Science,  Education,  Culture  and  Information 

Policy; 

  The  Council  of  the  Federation  Committee  on  the  House  Rules  and  Parliamentary 

Performance Management; 

Finally, members of the council that don't go into committees included: 

  Temporary committees; 

  Head and Council establishment; 

  Secretariats of the chairmen and council establishment; 

                                                           
5 www.duma.gov.ru/ 

 

     20 

  Committees establishment; 

  Authorities of council establishment; 

  Chairman committees; 

  Council agencies; 

  Council Legislative agency. 

The  Committees  include  public  representatives  from  different  federal  parts  of  federation, 

allowing  me  to  broaden  the  geographical  coverage  of  politicians.  Official  web-sides  provide  this 

information6. This dataset composed of 1819 persons. 

Government database 

To check the presence of ministers in the Board of Directors or Managers, I collected data of 

former and recent members of Government, Ministers and Presidential authorities.  

Since 1991 there were 14 compositions of the Government. The database included: 

  Chairman; 

  Deputy Chairman;  

  Federal Ministers; 

  State Council; 

  Security Council; 

  Presidential Administration. 

I added 522 persons. Official web-site information was used7. 

As  a  possible  direction  of  further  research,  regional  members  of  regional  governmental 

agencies  could  be  included.  Most  companies  in  a  dataset  operate  in  many  regions  of  Russian 

Federation.  The  companies  under  consideration  are  the  largest  ones,  so  I  assume  that  their 

representatives, if connected, should be on the highest federal level. As I mentioned, I scanned top 

officers  and  found  several  cases,  when  representatives  are  presented  in  regional  authorities.  For 

instance, Aleksandrovich Vladlen is a member of Norilsk town council. Such cases are also included 

in analyses. 

                                                           
6 www.council.gov.ru/ 
7 www.government.ru/ 

 

     21 

Finally,  the  dataset  was  completed.  It  consisted  of  5199  first  and  last  names  of  political 

workers  of  the  most  important  Federal  regulatory  authorities  and  1011  corporate  directors  and 

managers. 

Identification procedure 

To identify the connections, I used Excel functions to find the intersections in lists of public 

workers and corporate directors.  

I  used  VlookUp  function  in  Excel  to  get  the  intersections  in  names  between  lists  of  public 

and corporate workers. For similar family names, I scanned the similarity of first name and middle 

name. Logical and conditional functions were used. 

To define the connection I used the following assumption.  

Assumption 3: There is a connection if first, last and middle name are completely identical 

This  criterion  is  the  most  restrictive  one.  Certainly,  there  might  be  close  relatives  in  the 

sample. But the information  on biographies is  very  scarce. That is  why  I  relied only on maximum 

objective criteria.  

To  explore  the  connections  in  more  details,  I  also  scanned  the  biographies  of  companies’ 

CEO  and  Chairman  of  Board  of  Directors  in  internet  sources  (Forbes,  Commersant,  Lenta, 

Vedomosti etc) and search engines (Factiva, Public.ru). Results from both connections were added to 

the final sample.  

Direct  relationships  between  companies  and  government  are  not  disclosed.  First  of  all, 

politicians use different sophisticated ways to conceal incomes and ownership. Family members are 

often  involved;  however,  it  is  impossible  to  collect  consistent  dataset  on  all  family  members  and 

their ownership. It is required for politicians to disclose their incomes and ownership, but there are 

no strict legal requirements to disclose the incomes and ownership of relatives and family members, 

that  is  why  there  is  always  an  opportunity  to  work  it  around.  Secondly,  informal  and  unofficial 

connections could take place.  

I  suppose that it is  one  of the most important  limitations of the presented procedure.  There 

exist a large number of cases, when people, who are close to political elite, were appointed as firms’ 

heads discussed in press. These cases are definitely political connections, however, there is no legal 

 

     22 

prove  of  being  politically  connected.  Such  criteria  are  highly  subjective,  so  I  exclude  them 

completely. 

Due  to  this  reasons,  the  number  of  identified  connections  by  described  procedure  could  be 

small.  Analysis  based  on  smaller  than  true  number  of  politically  connections  produces  downward 

bias on the effect of political connection.  

 

 

 

 

     23 

Model and descriptive statistic 

The number of political connections found is 23 firms, 19% of total number of public private 

companies and 15% of total market capitalization. It is much larger than average 2,68% and 7,72% 

of total number and capitalization of listed companies in the world correspondingly (Faccio, 2006). 

It  is  consistent  with  Faccio  (2006)  that  in  Russia  over  10%  of  listed  companies  are  connected. 

However,  it  doesn’t  support  the  fact  that  politically  connected  firms  represent  86,75%  (Faccio, 

2006).  The  possible  explanation  for  that  is  a  small  number  of  firms  under  consideration  in  her 

analysis – 25 only.  

Firm characteristics are summarized in Table 2.  

Company 

Industry 

Event Date 

Connection authority 

Company’s representative 

Lukoil 

Oil and gas industry 

28.06.2007 

State Duma, Federal 
Council, Government 

Shokhin Aleksandr, BoD 

Norilsk Nickel 

Bashneft 

Baltica 

Polyus Zoloto 

Fosagro 

 

Nonferrous-metals 

industry 

17.12.2012 

Government 

Potanin Vladimir, BoM 

Oil and gas industry 

29.06.2011 

State Duma 

Mikhail Gutseriev, BoD 

Food industry 

14.08.2008 

Duma, Gov, Fed Con 

Shokhin Aleksandr, BoD 

Precious metals and 

diamonds 

Chemical and 
petrochemical 

industry 

27.06.2008 

State Duma 

Suleiman Kerimov, 

shareholder 

24.01.2013 

Federal Council 

Guriev Andrei, BoM 

TMK 

Iron industry 

27.06.2008 

State Duma, Federal 
Council, Government 

Shokhin Aleksandr, BoD 

Akron 

LSR Group 

Chemical and 
petrochemical 

industry 

Constructions 

material industry 

29.05.2008 

Federal Council 

Aleksandr Dynkin, BoD 

14.08.2006 

Federal Council 

Molchanov Andrei, 

shareholder 

IDGC of Centre 

Power sector 

11.12.2012 

Government 

Isaev Oleg, BoM 

Fortum 

Power sector 

30.05.2008 

State Duma, Federal 
Council, Government 

Shokhin Aleksandr, BoD 

Bank Saint-Petersburg 

Banks 

18.05.2006 

Federal Council 

Karmazinov Felix, BoD 

GAZ Group 

Engineering 

30.06.2010 

Government 

Shantsev Valeiry, BoD 

Korshunov Mining 

Plant 

Sollers 

Iron industry 

12.05.2008 

Regional authorities 

Alekseev Boris, BoD 

Engineering 

03.06.2008 

Government 

Yasin Evgeniy, BoD 

ChelPipe 

Iron industry 

30.06.2011 

Government 

Khristenko Valeriy, BoD 

Abrau-Durso 

Food industry 

22.06.2012 

Government 

Titov Pavel, BoD 

Tattelecom 

Sofrinsk Experimental-

Mechanical Plant 

Telecommunications 

industry 

24.06.2005 

Regional authorities 

(Tatarstan) 

Shafigulin Lutfulla, BoM 

Engineering 

29.06.2012 

Government 

Nechaev Andrei, BoD 

GUM 

Trade industry 

05.06.2007 

Government 

Malyshev, BoD 

     24 

 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

 

21 

22 

23 

Permskaya 

Energosbytovaya 

Power sector 

30.06.2008 

Government 

Urinson Yakov, BoD 

Company 

Primorie Bank 

Yaroslavl Sbytovaya 

Company 

Banks 

02.06.2011 

Government 

Sergei Darkin, shareholder 

Power sector 

- 

Federal Council 

Rogotskiy Victor, BoD 

Table 2. Politically connected companies 

It  could  be  concluded  from  the  sample  that  the  companies  from  different  industries  are 

politically connected. For instance,  four companies represent power sector, three of them represent 

iron industry. Reason for this evidence is that government is interested in pursuing control in several 

strategic corporations, especially in resource industries. If we take a look on a sample  of politically 

connected firms that were excluded by second filter, we can conclude that 17 out of 20 connections 

are operating in resource sector. 

To  find  out  if  political  connections  have  value  on  stock  performance,  I  implemented  event 

study’s  methodology.  Cumulative  abnormal  returns  around  the  date  of  announcement  should  be 

positive to represent the desired result. I use the same procedure as described in Brown and Warner 

(1985), Campbell et al (1997) and implemented by Faccio (2006). 

Event definition 

Assumption 4: Event of interest is a nomination of a former or current politician to the Board 

of Directors or Management.  

Collecting the data on politically  connected firms,  I came across with  several  limitations in 

methodology. 

Revising shareholders is important, since the connections might be established through them. 

However,  there  are  limitations  on  data  about  the  ownership  of  companies.  Besides,  most 

shareholders  are  holding  the  shares  for  a  long  time.  These  are  the  cases,  when  a  company  was 

headed in the beginning of 00th and top manager is the key shareholder. It doesn’t allow estimating 

the  effect  of  political  connection,  since  the  companies  were  not  public  at  the  time  of  initial 

shareholder acquisition. In order to be consistent, I excluded connections, where it is not possible to 

distinguish, when a shareholder starts to head a company. As discussed previously, it could possibly 

lead to downward bias. However, it commonly occurs that an initial shareholder is a top manager or 

director of a company simultaneously. The modified methodology considers all members of Boards, 

so it decreases the influence of described bias.  

 

     25 

Several  sources were used to  determine the date of directorship  announcement. Company’s 

lists  of  affiliated  persons  were  primary  sources.  Usually  the  members  of  Boards  are  reelected 

annually.  It happens sometimes when the board memberships change more frequently.  Information 

about changes in Boards’ memberships must be disclosed and is reflected in internal documents. The 

date of accidence of directorship is disclosed as well.  

I scanned information in press to double check the date of announcement8. For instance, the 

day when Vladimir Potanin officially entered Board of Directors of Norilsk Nickel is 17.12.2012. It 

is often the case when a press reports the designation a day or two before the official entrance day. 

To account for that I use (-2;+2) event window to capture price movements around these dates. 

Assumption 5: Event window is (-2;+2) around the announcement date. 

Selection criteria 

The  sample  of  interest  is  politically  connected  companies.  However,  not  all  23  companies 

provide  necessary  stock  prices  data  for  analyses.  After  adjustment,  the  final  sample  is  left  with  12 

companies.  

I collected stock prices for firms. Daily common stock prices were taken from Finam.ru and I 

calculated daily lognormal returns. The formula for lognormal returns is  

Ln Retit = ln (Pit) – ln (Pit-1), 

where Pit and Pit-1 are stock prices on day and previous day for every t in estimation period 

and for every stock i.  

Nowadays RTS and MICEX are operating as one exchange. Previously companies could be 

traded  on  either  one  of  the  exchanges  or  both.  I  included  MICEX  exchange  database,  because  it 

demonstrates number of trades. Higher liquidity of trades is necessary for collecting daily price rates.  

Bashneft,  Gaz  Group,  Korshunov  GOK  prices  rates  were  taken  from  RTS  stock  exchange: 

stocks  were  not  traded  on  MICEX  during  the  required  period.  I  used  RTS  stock  prices  data  only, 

when  MICEX  exchange  didn’t  provide  me  with  required  information.  In  all  other  cases  I  used 

MICEX rates. 

                                                           
8 Public.ru, Factiva search engines 

 

     26 

There  exists  a  thread  of  potential  upward  bias  in  rejection  of  null  hypothesis,  when  the 

trading liquidity is low (Brown and Warner, 1985). They state that the variance of returns around the 

event date might be overstated, when the stock trades poorly. I decrease the quality of performance, 

since  increasing  the  probablility  of  null  hypothesis.  For  this  reason,  I  exclude  Bashneft  and 

Permenergosbyt. I also exclude GAZ Group and Korshunov GOK, since the number of trades during 

the  year  is  too  small  –  less  than  65.  Such  small  number  of  trades  will  not  represent  daily  returns 

properly and will lead to biased and inconsistent estimator (Brown and Warner, 1985). 

Several  companies  were  excluded  since  stocks  were  not  trading  during  the  whole  year 

estimation  period.  For  instance,  Abrau  Durso  begins  19.06.2011,  but  it  started  trading  only  since 

11.04.2012.  The  sample  doesn’t  represent  enough  observations  to  build  reliable  normal  returns 

model. Bank Primorie was excluded by the same reason. 

I  also  exclude  Tattelecom  since  politically  connected  director,  Timur  Akulov,  entered  the 

company before it was public. There are no price rates around the date of nomination. Bank Saint-

Petersburg and LSR Group were excluded for the same reason.  

It  was  not  possible  to  distinguish  the  actual  date  of  announcement  of  Victor  Rogotskiy 

designation  to  Yaroslavl  Sbytovaya  Company,  since  the  information  in  list  of  affiliated  persons 

defines only the year – 2006 and no exact date. The information in web is also unavailable.  

These  limitations  in  data  are  necessary  for  proper  analysis;  however,  they  decrease  the 

sample size significantly. The sample size is low, and it is a drawback of the sample. However, tests 

might  be  implemented,  since  the  event  study  might  be  even  implemented  for  one  particular 

company. 

Normal and abnormal returns 

To calculate abnormal returns around the announcement date, the measure of normal returns 

on estimation window is necessary.  

Assumption 6: Estimation period is equal to 1 year. This is necessary to get 250 daily rates.  

This is a standard period of time to estimate the normal stock performance. It allows building 

a reliable and significant regression on the stock returns.  

The  basics  of  event  study’s  procedure  are  described  in  Campbell,  Lo,  MacKinley  (1997).   

They  are  standardized  and  the  researchers  implement  the  same  procedure  (Faccio,  2006; 

     27 

 

Jayachandran,  2006).  Normal  returns  are  defined  as  “returns  that  would  be  expected  if  the  event 

didn’t take place” (Campbell, Lo, MacKinley, 1997, p. 151). Abnormal returns are calculated using 

the formula: 

e*it = Rit - E(Rit|Xt), 

where eit  Rit, E(Rit) are abnormal, actual and normal returns respectively for time period t and stock i.  

Market model is chosen to build an estimation period model. Market model bases on a stable 

linear  relationship  between  an  individual  firm’s  return  and  the  market  return.  For  each  firm  i,  I 

estimate the following equation using stock price data for each day t during estimation period: 

Rit =α + β*MktRtnit +ε, 

where Rit,, MktRtnit are actual and market return for time period t and stock i correspondingly. 

The  proxy  for  market  return  is  MICEX  index.  The  index  is  a  daily  composite  value-index, 

which comprises 50 largest public companies. To calculate log returns on MICEX index, I used the 

following formula: 

Ln Returnst = ln (It) – ln (It-1), 

where It and It-1 are market index values of that and previous day for each t. 

The  returns  of  the  market  are  adjusted  to  the  same  time  period;  this  allows  avoiding  non-

synchronous  trading  bias  (Brown  et  al.  1985).  For  instance,  GUM  stocks  were  not  traded  between 

4.08.2006  and  8.08.2006.  The  stock  price  on  7.08.2006  is  not  available,  so  the  market  return  is 

adjusted to the same days – 4th and 8th. 

The  parameters  of  regressions  are  estimated  during  estimation  window  based  on  250 

observations of stock and market returns. Cumulative abnormal return in a particular event window 

day is described as the sum of previously compounded abnormal returns plus the abnormal return of 

this day. 

After  performing  regression  I  designed  the  testing  procedures  based  on  multivariate 

distribution of 12 stocks returns. The details are presented in the following topics. 

 

 

     28 

Results 

Estimation  period regressions were prepared in  Eviews.  Full list  of statistics and regression 

coefficients are shown in Appendix B.  

I tested the significance of the normal returns model for each stock. I used the p-values of the 

regression coefficients and R squared to check if the regression fits well the estimation period model. 

Summary of the coefficients is presented in Table 3. 

Stock 

Coefficient α 

Coefficient β 

P-value α 

P-value β 

R squared 

P-value F-stat 

Akron 

0.005297 

0.465298 

0.0012 

0.0000 

0.087280 

0.000002 

Baltica 

-0.001434 

0.198802 

ChelPipe 

0.000468 

0.975386 

Fortum 

0.000134 

0.219762 

0.0519 

0.6871 

0.9038 

0.0000 

0.0000 

0.0008 

0.089274 

0.000002 

0.284990 

0.000000 

0.044106 

0.000834 

GUM 

IDGC 

-0.000246 

0.298075 

0.8900 

0.0009 

0.043618 

-0.001166 

0.875371 

0.4187 

0.0000 

0.190611 

Lukoil 

-0.001136 

1.013883 

0.0640 

0.0000 

0.761957 

NorNik 

0.000194 

0.901479 

0.7745 

0.0000 

0.525997 

Polyus Gold 

0.000563 

0.864141 

0.7621 

0.0000 

0.195840 

SEMZ 

Sollers 

-0.001579 

0.305726 

0.7003 

0.1468 

0.008471 

0.002043 

0.370963 

0.055 

0.0000 

0.124322 

TMK 

-0.000905 

0.752217 

0.5260 

0.0000 

0.239818 

0.000893 

0.000000 

0.000000 

0.000000 

0.000000 

0.146762 

0.000000 

0.000000 

Table 3. Regression statistics 

It could be seen from the table that β coefficients are significant at 99% significance level in 

all regressions, except SEMZ. We also observe that R squared is not so high, but F-statistic shows 

significance  at  99%  significance  level  for  the  whole  regression  for  every  stock,  except  SEMZ.  It 

doesn’t  matter  if  α  coefficient  is  not  significant  in  some  cases.  We  could  use  excess  returns 

 

     29 

regressions instead to eliminate non-significance of intercept. I exclude SEMZ regression, in order to 

get unbiased estimates of abnormal returns. 

Based on the estimated coefficients of α and β, I define abnormal returns for each stock and 

for each day in event window. The summary is presented in Table 4. 

  

Akron  Baltica  ChelPipe  Fortum  GUM 

IDGC 

Lukoil  Nickel  Sollers  TMK 

Fortum 

Day 1 

0,039 

0,027 

-0,010 

-0,002 

-0,002 

0,001 

0,008 

-0,002 

0,037 

0,110 

-0,025 

Day 2 

0,047 

0,013 

0,000 

-0,006 

-0,016 

0,011 

0,005 

-0,001 

0,046 

0,051 

0,029 

Day 3 

0,037 

0,019 

-0,004 

-0,003 

-0,032 

-0,011 

-0,002 

0,034 

0,044 

0,087 

0,008 

Day 4 

0,041 

0,038 

-0,023 

-0,006 

-0,020 

-0,015 

-0,010 

0,036 

0,056 

0,060 

0,008 

Day 5 

0,064 

0,048 

-0,006 

-0,003 

-0,017 

0,020 

-0,022 

0,046 

0,045 

0,075 

0,016 

Table 4. Daily cumulative abnormal returns 

 

Day5 line represents cumulative abnormal returns around the whole event window.  

To perform the testing procedures, I calculate J1 and J2 statistics which are used for inference. Both 

statistics  are  based  on  cross-sectional  hypothesis  about  abnormal  returns.  I  also  calculated  the 

individual event  significance in Excel  spreadsheet,  but  I am  more interested in  average cumulative 

abnormal returns significance. 

 

Under the null hypothesis the average cumulative abnormal  returns  for the observed stocks 

are equal to zero. It means that under null hypothesis the event doesn’t have statistically significant 

effect  on  stock  performance.  The  alternative  hypothesis  might  be  different.  First  one  is  based  on 

two-sided test and states that there was an effect of event on stock prices dynamics. The second one 

is  a one-sided test that is why it is  stricter.  It  states that the effect  of observed event  is  positive on 

stock returns.  

 

J1 and J2 statistics are aggregate measures. In this meaning they average the critical value 

through time and among assets. The formulas are the following: 

    

                
             

         , 

                   

 
 

 

                

  

   

where 

 

     30 

  

                    

 

    

               

 

         

 
   

           

 

           

 
   

 

 

J2 statistic is calculated as following: 

      

       

      

      

                        , 

where 

                 
    

 
 

 

                  

 

   

                

                 
 
             

The calculation is showed in Excel spreadsheet.  

J1 statistic is equal 1,7577. 

J2 is equal 2,019. 

Both  statistics  are  significant  at  95%  confidence  level.  It  means  that  the  null  hypothesis  is 

rejected and cumulative abnormal returns were influenced by event occurred.  

One sided test has critical value of 1,96 for 95% confidence level. We conclude that we fail 

to reject the null hypothesis and the event doesn’t have positive effect.  

Following  the  literature  prescriptions,  stock  returns  should  be  tested  for  normality. 

Lognormal  returns  are  distributed  on  average  closer  to  normal  compared  to  net  simple  returns. 

However,  a  drawback  of  the  dataset  was  found  out  here.  Several  normality  tests  metrics  were 

implied to return distributions and provided evidence on strong non-normality. The summary of the 

tests are presented in Table 5. 

Stock 

Skewness 

Kurtosis 

Skewness test p-value  Kurtosis test p-value 

Jarque-Bera 

JB p-value 

Akron 

0.929518 

7.112576 

0,0000 

0,0000 

212.1801 

0,0000 

 

     31 

Baltica 

-1.347958 

9.381986 

ChelPipe 

0.049847 

3.889157 

Fortum 

GUM 

0.900898 

 

2.749821 

 

6.819345 

28.94400 

IDGC 

0.018636 

4.951186 

3.964856 

Lukoil 

NorNik 

Polyus Gold 

-0.135772 

 

0.336022 

 

 

-3.202174 

 

0,0000 

0,3738 

0,0000 

0,0000 

0,4521 

0,1904 

0,0000 

499.9762 

0,0000 

0,0021 

8.338940 

0,0000 

0,0000 

185.7695 

0,0000 

0,0000 

7326.427 

0,0000 

0,0000 

39.67204 

0,0000 

0,0009 

10.46545 

0,0000 

4.983596 

0,0150 

0,0000 

45.69057 

0,0000 

45.60324 

0,0000 

0,0000 

19333.87 

0,0000 

Sollers 

0.826888 

4.762092 

TMK 

0.189360 

4.820290 

0,0000 

0,1108 

0,0000 

60.83279 

0,0000 

0,0000 

36.00920 

0,0000 

Table 5. Normality tests 

Jarque-Bera  statistic  and  its  p-value  is  0,0000  for  each  stock  return.  It  means  that  the  null 

hypothesis  of  being  normally  distributed  is  rejected.  Skewness  tests  demonstrate  the  rejection  of 

normality  hypothesis.  It  is  rejected  for  7  out  of  11  stocks.  Kurtosis  tests  also  demonstrate  the 

rejection of normality hypothesis. It is rejected for all 11 stock returns. 

Uncorrelated  returns  as  well  as  multivariate  normality  of  returns  are  key  assumptions  of 

event study’s tests. Normality testing procedures indicate a violation of assumption of event study’s 

tests. The event study results must be considered with the degree of doubt.  

It  is  widespread  problem,  when  stocks  returns  are  not  normally  distributed  (Brown  and 

Warner, 1985). Corrado and Zivney (1992) state that non-parametric tests are more commonly used 

than parametric tests since they overcome sample distribution drawbacks. 

Non-parametric  tests  relax  the  assumption  of  normality  distribution  (Corrado,  1989).  Sign 

and rank tests are most popular ones. I imply both of them to the sample.  

Sign tests require two assumptions: abnormal returns must be independent across stocks and 

the proportion of expected positive abnormal returns is equal to proportion of negative returns and 

equal  to  0,5.  Sign  tests  are  based  on  the  signs  of  abnormal  returns.  They  are  were  simple  to 

 

     32 

implement  and  so  not  fit  well  for  a  daily  data,  since  daily  data  is  highly  skewed  (as  we  can  see 

previously).  Skewness  distorts  equal  proportion  assumption  and  weakens  the  test  inferences.  For 

demonstrative purposes I performed it in analysis.  

J3 test statistic is calculated by the following formula: 

      

 

 

 

        

 
 

 

   

         , 

where      is  a  number  of  positive  cumulative  abnormal  returns  in  a  cross-section,  N  is  a 

number of stocks. 

In my sample, there are 7 positive cumulative abnormal returns.  

J3 statistic is equal to 0,5527708.  

The  result  is  not  significant;  meaning  that  null  hypothesis  of  having  positive  cumulative 

abnormal returns is rejected. 

Another  test  used  is  rank  test.  It  improves  the  weaknesses  associated  with  sign  tests.  In 

particularly, it allows applying the test to daily data samples.  

There are two specifications of rank tests. They have the same assumptions, but the size of 

the used sample data varies. The first specification ranks abnormal returns during event window. The 

other includes also  ranks of estimation period returns.  The ranks are appointed in  ascending order. 

That means the lowest return gets the first rank.  

The statistic is calculated by the following formula: 

    

 
 

 

 

   

      

      

 
     

 

          

           
  

 

  
      

 

 

 

        

 
   

    
 

 

 

 

, 

where Kit is a rank of stock I at time t (t=0 is event date), L2 is a event period length. 

The  sample  J4  is  equal  to  -0,534529  and  is  insignificant.  The  null  hypothesis  of  positive  effect  is 

rejected at 95% significance level.  

                                                           
9 Calculation include SEMZ company 

 

     33 

 

The  second  specification  includes  ranks  of  return  series  in  estimation  period.  Excel 

spreadsheet calculates the critical value of test. The formula used is the same as described above. 

 

Calculated J4 equals -0,3301. It means that null hypothesis is rejected. The is no positive or 

negative effect of event on stock prices.  

 I  also  applied  non-parametric  GRANK  test,  which  has  many  benefits:  "First,  it  is  robust  to 

event-induced  volatility.  Second,  the  empirical  power  of  the  test  proves  to  dominate  popular 

parametric tests as well as existing rank tests of cumulative abnormal returns. Third, it is reasonably 

robust to autocorrelation of abnormal  returns. Fourth, it is robust against a certain degree of cross-

correlation  caused  by  event  day  clustering.  Fifth,  and  last,  it  is  distribution  free  and  thus  less 

sensitive to distributional assumptions than parametric counterparts." (Kolari and Pynnonen, 2011, p. 

2) 

The test statistic is follows 

            

   

     

           

                    

where Z ratio is properly normalized (Equation (13 Kolari  et. al 2011) using cross-sectional 

variance in rescaled ranks of GSAR, which series is given below 

          

                                       
      
                     

  

In my case        is equal to 1.14 (p-value is 0.2). We fail to reject the null of no mean event 

effect. 

Concluding the estimated procedures, I would state that the estimated results do not support 

the  states  hypothesis.  Tests  based  on  parametric  assumptions  provide  support,  but  do  not  rely  on 

required assumptions. They should not be considered as the proper ones. Non-parametric tests do not 

support the hypothesis that political connection affects the stock price around nomination date.  

There are several reasons for that.  

First of all, it is a lack of data on unofficial and personified connections. Connections through 

relatives are also not captured by the methodology. The absence of this data decreases the number of 

politically  connected  sample  and  understates  the  possible  positive  effect.  The  connection  might  be 

established  and  some  effect  exists,  but  it  is  not  identified.  For  instance,  Novatek  might  be  a  good 

 

     34 

example.  It  is  known  from  press  that  Gennadiy  Timchenko,  the  head  and  shareholder  of  the 

company, is a close friend of Vladimir Putin. The connection and preferences might be provided by 

these  relationships.  However,  he  doesn’t  hold  any  official  public  position,  so  the  methodology 

ignores it.  

Secondly, the  results are not  proved, because connections are  established long  time ago.  In 

the yearly 2000th businessmen acquired state companies during the privatization. Some of them hold 

top managers positions simultaneously and remain key shareholders till nowadays. During the time 

of  privatization  business  elite  was  very  close  to  governmental.  Since  then  corporate-political 

relationships could be established and existed till now. Long lasted relationships will not be reflected 

in stock price fluctuations. In this case the implemented procedure will not capture these effects.  

Finally,  the  connections  might  be  established  not  only  through  federal  authorities,  but  also 

through regional ones. This issue might be an object of further research. 

 

 

 

 

 

     35 

Conclusion 

Thesis  paper  presents  the  analysis  of  political  connections  on  firms’  performance 

implications. It focuses on Russian market and describes the presence of political connections among 

largest Russian public companies. 

To perform the research I collected broad database on public workers and corporate directors. 

The  number  of  current  and  former  public  workers  comprised  5199  persons.  The  data  includes 

current and former members of Government, Federal Assembly of Russian Federation, Presidential 

Office and related committees. I studied firms’ quarterly reports and lists of affiliated persons to find 

out the members of Board of Directors and Board of Management. The total number of members of 

both Boards comprised 1011 officers. 

I  used  Excel  functions  to  search  for  similarities  in  the  names  between  two  lists.  Finally,  I 

found  out  that  the  connections  are  established  in  23  companies  out  of  total  121  analyzed  private 

public companies. These companies represent 43% and 15% of market capitalization of total number 

of private companies and total number of all analyzed companies correspondingly.  

Event study methodology was implemented to test the effect of political connection on stock 

price fluctuations. The event of interest was the nomination of politically connected representative to 

the company.  

I  assumed  that  the  firm  is  able  to  exploit  several  benefits  when  it  is  being  close  to  the 

government  based  on  the  review  of  academic  literature.  I  expected  to  observe  short-run  abnormal 

price  increases  during  the  event  window.  In  this  case  the  announcement  of  public  worker’s 

nomination to companies Boards is expected to be positive signal for investors and the prices should 

go up.  

Stock  returns  around  the  announcement  date  were  explored.  Using  the  event  study’s 

procedures  I  tested  cumulative  abnormal  returns  for  being  affected  by  the  event  of  interest.  J1,  J2 

parametric  tests  were  performed.  They  conclude  the  rejection  of  null  hypothesis,  meaning  that  the 

returns experiences abnormal  returns around the  event  date. However, the implementation  of these 

tests  is  limited and is under concern, since  financial  data doesn’t support the required properties.  I 

checked  the  normality  of  the  return  series  and  rejected  the  hypothesis,  that  returns  are  normal  and 

multivariate normal. This is a matter of concern and limits the proposed results.  

 

     36 

I  implemented  non-parametric  tests  to  test  the  same  hypothesis.  Non-parametric  tests  relax 

the  assumption  of  normality  of  returns  and  are  appropriate  methods  for  the  analysis.  J3,  J4  and 

expanded  J4  metrics  are  used  to  make  inferences.  I  also  calculated  GRANK-T  test  statistic 

introduced by Kolari, Pynnonen (2011). Unfortunately, the hypothesis of positive abnormal returns 

was rejected by these procedures.  

I conclude the thesis paper with the caveats and potential directions of research.  

First of all, the methodology of the research could be expanded.  

  Dynamics  of  Boards  members  could  be  introduced.  It  means  that  former  Boards  members 

might  also  be  connected.  Introduced  procedure  doesn’t  capture  dynamics  and  is  relies  on 

current cross-sectional data. 

  Members  of  regional  authorities  could  be  added  to  the  database.  Additional  connections 

could be identified within this data.  

  Relatives  and  friendship  relationships  could  be  introduces.  It  is  a  matter  of  subjectivity 

though, but the existence of informal and friendship relationships are quite spread and press 

could  be analyzed  for that  issues.  I excluded it, since it brings the degree of subjectivity in 

research.  

Secondly, the empirics and econometric models could be improved.  

  Parametric  procedures  are  criticized  and  are  under  concern  since  the  weaknesses  of  stock 

series  data  characteristics.  Non-parametric  tests  fit  well,  but  do  not  prove  the  expected 

hypothesis. I suggest that the research could be improved by developing customized statistics 

for implication of parametric tests.  

 

Introduced  methodology  captures  short-term  effect  of  political  connections.  Though  it 

remains  popular  among  academic  researchers,  long-term  effects  are  also  estimated  and 

described in literature. The concepts of the research could be modified in order to experience 

those effects.  

Concluding that, thesis paper research adds insight on the situation on Russian market, which 

previously remained almost unexplored. It doesn’t support expected results, nevertheless, it derives 

the  result  of  neutrality  in  short  term  effect  of  politically  connected  officer  nomination  to  the  firm 

Boards. 

 

     37 

References 

Journal articles: 

1)  Austen-Smith  D.,  Wright  J.  R.  Theory  and  evidence  for  counteractive  lobbying  //  American 

Journal  of  Political  Science.  1996.  Vol.  40.  No.  2.  P.  543-564.  Available  from  JSTOR: 

<http://www.jstor.org/stable/2111637>. 

2)  Baysinger B.D. Domain maintenance as an objective of business political activity: An expanded 

typology // Academy of Management Review. 1984. Vol. 9. No. 2. P. 248-258. Available from 

JSTOR: <http://www.jstor.org/stable/258438>. 

3)  Charumilind C., Kali R., Wiwattanakantang Y. Connected lending: Thailand before the financial 

crisis  //  Journal  of  Business.  2006.  Vol.  79.  No.  1.  P.181-218.  Available  from  JSTOR: 

<http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/497410>. 

4)  Claessens  S.,  Feijen  E.,  Laeven  L.  Political  connections  and  preferential  access  to  finance:  the 

role  of  campaign  contributions  //  Journal  of  Financial  Economics.  2008.  Vol.  88.  P.  554-580. 

Available from ELSEVIER. 

5)  Corrado C. J. A nonparametric test for abnormal security-price performance in event studies // 

Journal of Financial Economics. 1989. Vol. 23. P. 385-395. Available from ELSEVIER. 

6)  Corrado  C.J.,  Zivney  T.  L.  The  Specification  and  Power  of  the  Sign  Test  in  Event  Study 

Hypothesis  Tests  Using  DailyStock  Returns  //  The  Journal  of  Financial  and  Quantitative 

Analysis. 

1992.  Vol. 

27.  No. 

3. 

P.465-478.  Available 

from 

JSTOR: 

<http://www.jstor.org/stable/2331331>. 

7)  Cooper M.J., Gulen H., Ovtchinnikov A.V. Corporate Political Contributions and Stock Returns // 

The Journal of Finance. 2010. Vol. 65. P. 687-724. Available from Wiley InterScience.  

8)  Faccio M., Masulis R.W., McConnell J.J. Political connections and corporate bailouts // Journal 

of  Finance.  2006.  Vol.  61.  No.  6.  P.  2597-2635.  Available 

from 

JSTOR: 

<http://www.jstor.org/stable/4123440>. 

9)  Fisman R. Estimating the Value of Political Connections // American Economic Review. 2001. 

Vol. 91. No. 4. P. 1095-1102. Available from JSTOR: <http://www.jstor.org/stable/2677829>. 

10) Frye  T.M.,  Iwasaki  I.  Government  directors  and  business–state  relations  in  Russia  //  European 

Journal of Political Economy. 2011. Vol. 27. P. 642–658. Available from ELSEVIER. 

 

     38 

11) Getz  K.A.  Public  affairs  and  political  strategy:  theoretical  foundations  //  Journal  of  Public 

Affairs. 2001. Vol. 1. No. 4. P. 305–329. Available from Wiley InterScience.  

12) Granovetter  M.  Economic  action  and  social  structure:  The  problem  of  embeddedness  // 

American  Journal  of  Sociology.  1985.  Vol.  91.  No.  3.  P.481-510.  Available  from  JSTOR: 

<http://www.jstor.org/stable/2780199>. 

13) Grier  K.B.,  Munger  M.C.  Comparing  Interest  Group  PAC  Contributions  to  House  and  Senate 

Incumbents,  1980-1986  //  The  Journal  of  Politics.  1993.  Vol.  55.  No.  3.  P.615-643.  Available 

from JSTOR: <http://www.jstor.org/stable/2131991>. 

14) Hersch  P.,  Netter  J.M.,  Pope  C.  Do  Campaign  Contributions  and  Lobbying  Expenditures  by 

Firms Create “Political”  Capital? //  Atlantic Economic Journal. 2008. Vol. 36.  Issue 4. P. 395-

405. Available from SpringerLink. 

15) Hillman A.J., Keim G.D., Schuler D. Corporate political activity: A review and research agenda 

// Joumal of Management. 2004. Vol. 30. No. 6. P. 837-857. Available from Wiley InterScience. 

16) Jayachandran  S.  The  Jeffords  Effect  //  Journal  of  Law  and  Economics.  2006.  Vol.  49.  No.2. 

P.397–425. Available from JSTOR: <http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/501091>. 

17) Johnson  S.,  Mitton  T.  Cronyism  and  Capital  Controls:  Evidence  from  Malaysia  //  Journal  of 

Financial Economics. 2003. Vol. 67. No. 2. P. 351-82. Available from ELSEVIER. 

18) Keim G., Baysinger B. The Efficacy of Business Political Activity: Competitive Considerations 

in  a  Principal-Agent  Context  //  Journal  of  Management.  1988.  Vol.  14.  No.  2.  P.  163-180. 

Available from SAGE: <http://jom.sagepub.com/content/14/2/163>. 

19) Keim  G.  D.,  Zeithaml  C.  P.  Corporate  political  strategy  and  legislative  decision  making:  A 

review  and  contingency  approach  //  Academy  of  Management  Review.  1986.  Vol.  11.  P.  828-

843. Available from JSTOR: < http://www.jstor.org/stable/258400>. 

20) Khwaja  A.I.,  Mian  A.  Do  lenders  favor  politically  connected  firms?  Rent  provision  in  an 

emerging  financial  market  //  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics.  2005.  Vol.  120.  P.  1371-1411. 

Available from JSTOR: < http://www.jstor.org/stable/25098774>. 

21) Kolari  J.W.,  Pynnonen  S.  Nonparametric  rank  tests  for  event  studies  //  Journal  of  Empirical 

Finance. 2011. Vol. 18. P. 953–971. Available from ELSEVIER. 

22) Schuler  D.,  Rehbein  K.,  Cramer  R.  Pursuing  strategic  advantage  through  political  means:  A 

multivariate  approach  //  Academy  of  Management  Journal.  2002.  Vol.  45.  No.  4.  P.  659-672. 

Available from JSTOR: <http://www.jstor.org/stable/3069303>. 

 

     39 

23) Wu W., Wu C., Rui O.M. 2012 Ownership and the Value of Political Connections: Evidence from 

China  //  European  Financial  Management.  2012.  Vol.  18.  No.  4.  P.  695–729.  Available  from 

Wiley InterScience.  

24) Yakovlev A., Simachev Y., Danilov Y. The Russian corporation: patterns of behaviour during the 

crisis  //  Post-Communist  Economies.  2010.  Vol.  22.  Issue  2.  P.  129-140.  Available  from 

EBSCOHost. 

 

Books: 

25) Dolgopyatova T., Iwasaki I., Yakovlev A. Organization and development of Russian business: a 

firm-level analysis. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009 

26) Mundo P.A. Organizational analysis of interest groups // Mundo P.A. Interest Groups: Cases and 

Characteristics. Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1992. P. 18-38. 

27) Oberman  W.  D.  Strategy  and  tactic  choice  in  an  institutional  resource  context  //  Mitnick  B.M. 

Corporate Political Agency: The Construction of Competition in Public Affairs.  Newbury Park, 

CA: Sage, 1993. P.213-241. 

28) Plotke D. The political mobilization of business // Petracca M. P. The Politics of Interest Groups 

Transformed. Boulder, CO: Westview, 1992. P.175-198. 

29) Williamson  O.E.  The  Economic  Institutions  of  Capitalism:  Firms,  Markets,  Relational 

Contracting. New York: Free Press, 1985. P. 15-38  

 

Working papers: 

30) Aggarwal  R.K.,  Meschke  F.,  Wang  T.Y.  Corporate  Political  Donations:  Investment  or  agency? 

2008 WFA Meeting Paper; AFA 2012 Chicago Meetings Paper. 5 April 2012. 

31) Bandeira-de-Mello  R.,  Marcon  R.  The  Value  of  Business  Group  Affiliation  for  Political 

Connections: Preferential Lending in Brazil 

32) Do  Q-A.,  Lee  Y-T.,  Nguyen  B.D.  Political  Connections  and  Firm  Value:  Evidence  from  the 

Regression Discontinuity Design of Close Gubernatorial Elections. November 2012. 

Internet resources: 

33) Federal Council of Russian Federation website. http://www.council.gov.ru/ 

34) Russian Federation Government website. http://government.ru/ 

 

     40 

35) State Duma of Russian Federation website. http://www.duma.gov.ru/ 

36) Search engine. http://www.public.ru/ 

37) Factiva search engine. http://www.dowjones.com/ 

38) Ria Novosti news portal. http://ria.ru/ 

39) RA Expert Rating Agency. http://www.raexpert.ru/ 

 

 

 

 

     41 

Appendix 

Appendix A. Second filter state companies 

Company 

Rosneft 

TNK-BP 

Novatek 

Uralkali 

Chemical and 
petrochemical 

industry 

Gazpromneft 

Oil and gas industry 

Industry 

Connection 

authority 

Company’s representative 

Oil and gas industry 

Government 

Sechin Igor, BoM, BoD 

Oil and gas industry 

Government 

Sechin Igor, BoM 

Oil and gas industry 

Government 

Vardanyan Ruben, BoD 

State Duma 

Kerimov Suleiman, shareholder 

Fed Council, 

Regional 
structures 

Golubev Valeriy, BoD, 
Serdyukov Valeriy, BoD 

Bank of Moscow 

Transcreditbank 

Banks 

Banks 

Government 

Zadornov Mickhail, BoD 

Government 

Zadornov Mickhail, BoD 

Irkutskenergo 

Power industry 

Government 

Kovalchyuk Boris, BoD 

OGK-3 

OGK-1 

AvtoVaz 

Kamaz 

Dalnevostochnaya 
Energetic Company 

Power industry 

Government 

Kovalchyuk Boris, BoD 

Power industry 

Government 

Kovalchyuk Boris, BoD 

Engineering 

Engineering 

Power industry 

Government 

Government 

Regional 
structures 

Vardanyan Ruben, BoD 

Vardanyan Ruben, BoD 

Milush Victor, BoM 

Mosenergosbyt 

Power industry 

Government 

Kovalchyuk Boris, BoD 

Petersburg Sbytovaya 

Company 

Ufa Engine Industrial 

Association 

TGK-11 

Power industry 

Government 

Kovalchyuk Boris, BoD 

Engineering 

Regional 
structures 

Artuykhov Aleksandr, BoM 

Power industry 

Government 

Kojhemyako Sergey, BoM 

TGK-2 

Power industry 

Regional 
structures 

Aleksandrovich Vladlen, BoM 

Central Telegraph 

Telecommunications 

Government 

Bulgak Vladimir, BoD 

Chemical and 
petrochemical 

industry 

Regional 
structures 

Akulov Timur, BoD 

Nizhnekamskshina 

 

 

     42 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

t-Statistic 

 
 

3.283128 
4.869851 

Appendix B. Estimation models 

1)  Akron 

Dependent Variable: RETURNS_AKRON 
Method: Least Squares 
Date: 06/17/13   Time: 01:07 
Sample: 1 250 
Included observations: 250 

 

 
 

Variable 

 
 
C 

MICEX_AKRON 

 
 

R-squared 
Adjusted R-squared 
S.E. of regression 
Sum squared resid 
Log likelihood 
F-statistic 
Prob(F-statistic) 

 
 
2)  Baltica 

 
 

Coefficient 

 
 

0.005297 
0.465298 

 
 

Std. Error 

 
 

0.001613 
0.095547 

 
 

 
 

 
 
0.087280     Mean dependent var 
0.083600     S.D. dependent var 
0.025487     Akaike info criterion 
0.161099     Schwarz criterion 
563.6646     Hannan-Quinn criter. 
23.71545     Durbin-Watson stat 
 
0.000002 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

Dependent Variable: RETURNS_BALT 
Method: Least Squares 
Date: 06/17/13   Time: 01:19 
Sample: 1 250 
Included observations: 250 

 
 
 
 
 
 

t-Statistic 

 
 

-1.953078 
4.930548 

 

 
 

Std. Error 

 
 

0.000734 
0.040320 

 
 

Coefficient 

 
 

-0.001434 
0.198802 

 
 

 
 

 
 
0.089274     Mean dependent var 
0.085602     S.D. dependent var 
0.011601     Akaike info criterion 
0.033377     Schwarz criterion 
760.4325     Hannan-Quinn criter. 
24.31031     Durbin-Watson stat 
 
0.000002 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

Variable 

 
 
C 

MICEX_BALT 

 
 

R-squared 
Adjusted R-squared 
S.E. of regression 
Sum squared resid 
Log likelihood 
F-statistic 
Prob(F-statistic) 

 
 

3)  ChelPipe 

Dependent Variable: RETURNS_CHELPIPE 
Method: Least Squares 
Date: 06/17/13   Time: 01:24 
Sample: 1 250 
Included observations: 250 

 

 
 

Variable 

 
 
C 

MICEX_CHEL_PIPE 

 
 

Coefficient 

 
 

0.000468 
0.975386 

 
 

Std. Error 

 
 

0.001160 
0.098105 

 
 
 
 
 
 

t-Statistic 

 
 

0.403271 
9.942247 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prob.   
 
 
0.0012 
0.0000 
 
 

0.005614 
0.026624 
-4.493317 
-4.465145 
-4.481979 
1.780481 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prob.   
 
 
0.0519 
0.0000 
 
 

-0.001594 
0.012132 
-6.067460 
-6.039288 
-6.056121 
2.158416 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prob.   
 
 
0.6871 
0.0000 

     43 

 
 

R-squared 
Adjusted R-squared 
S.E. of regression 
Sum squared resid 
Log likelihood 
F-statistic 
Prob(F-statistic) 

 
 
4)  Fortum 

 
 

 
 

 
 
0.284990     Mean dependent var 
0.282107     S.D. dependent var 
0.018317     Akaike info criterion 
0.083209     Schwarz criterion 
646.2486     Hannan-Quinn criter. 
98.84828     Durbin-Watson stat 
 
0.000000 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

Dependent Variable: RETURNS_FORTUM 
Method: Least Squares 
Date: 06/17/13   Time: 01:27 
Sample: 1 250 
Included observations: 250 

 

 
 

Variable 

 
 
C 

MICEX_FORTUM 

 
 

R-squared 
Adjusted R-squared 
S.E. of regression 
Sum squared resid 
Log likelihood 
F-statistic 
Prob(F-statistic) 

 
 

5)  GUM 

 
 

Coefficient 

 
 

0.000134 
0.219762 

 
 

Std. Error 

 
 

0.001106 
0.064965 

 
 

 
 

 
 
0.044106     Mean dependent var 
0.040252     S.D. dependent var 
0.017473     Akaike info criterion 
0.075718     Schwarz criterion 
658.0397     Hannan-Quinn criter. 
11.44305     Durbin-Watson stat 
 
0.000834 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

Dependent Variable: RETURNS_GUM 
Method: Least Squares 
Date: 06/17/13   Time: 01:31 
Sample: 1 250 
Included observations: 250 

 
 
 
 
 
 

t-Statistic 

 
 

0.120952 
3.382758 

 
 
 
 
 
 

t-Statistic 

 
 

-0.138501 
3.363129 

 

 
 

Std. Error 

 
 

0.001777 
0.088630 

 
 

Coefficient 

 
 

-0.000246 
0.298075 

 
 

 
 

 
 
0.043618     Mean dependent var 
0.039762     S.D. dependent var 
0.028076     Akaike info criterion 
0.195486     Schwarz criterion 
539.4811     Hannan-Quinn criter. 
11.31064     Durbin-Watson stat 
 
0.000893 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

Variable 

 
 
C 

MICEX_GUM 

 
 

R-squared 
Adjusted R-squared 
S.E. of regression 
Sum squared resid 
Log likelihood 
F-statistic 
Prob(F-statistic) 

 
 

6)  IDGC 

Dependent Variable: RETURNS_IDGC 
Method: Least Squares 

 

 

 
 

0.001087 
0.021619 
-5.153989 
-5.125817 
-5.142650 
1.727209 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prob.   
 
 
0.9038 
0.0008 
 
 

0.000240 
0.017836 
-5.248318 
-5.220146 
-5.236979 
2.583362 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prob.   
 
 
0.8900 
0.0009 
 
 

-5.87E-05 
0.028651 
-4.299849 
-4.271677 
-4.288510 
2.503992 

 
 
 

 
 

     44 

Date: 06/17/13   Time: 01:34 
Sample: 1 250 
Included observations: 250 

 
 

Variable 

 
 
C 

MICEX_IDGC 

 
 

R-squared 
Adjusted R-squared 
S.E. of regression 
Sum squared resid 
Log likelihood 
F-statistic 
Prob(F-statistic) 

 
 
7)  Lukoil 

 
 

Coefficient 

 
 

-0.001166 
0.875371 

 

 
 

Std. Error 

 
 

0.001439 
0.114544 

 
 
 
 
 

t-Statistic 

 
 

-0.810092 
7.642252 

 
 

 
 

 
 
0.190611     Mean dependent var 
0.187347     S.D. dependent var 
0.022748     Akaike info criterion 
0.128329     Schwarz criterion 
592.0928     Hannan-Quinn criter. 
58.40401     Durbin-Watson stat 
 
0.000000 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

Dependent Variable: RETURNS_LUK 
Method: Least Squares 
Date: 06/17/13   Time: 01:36 
Sample: 1 250 
Included observations: 250 

 
 
 
 
 
 

t-Statistic 

 
 

-1.860191 
28.17499 

 

 
 

Std. Error 

 
 

0.000611 
0.035985 

 
 

Coefficient 

 
 

-0.001136 
1.013883 

 
 

 
 

 
 
0.761957     Mean dependent var 
0.760998     S.D. dependent var 
0.009631     Akaike info criterion 
0.023003     Schwarz criterion 
806.9657     Hannan-Quinn criter. 
793.8303     Durbin-Watson stat 
 
0.000000 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

t-Statistic 

 
 

0.286761 
16.58926 

 

 
 

Std. Error 

 
 

0.000678 
0.054341 

 
 

Coefficient 

 
 

0.000194 
0.901479 

 
 

 
 

 
 
0.525997     Mean dependent var 
0.524086     S.D. dependent var 
0.010713     Akaike info criterion 
0.028465     Schwarz criterion 
780.3326     Hannan-Quinn criter. 

 
 

Variable 

 
 
C 

MICEX_LUK 

 
 

R-squared 
Adjusted R-squared 
S.E. of regression 
Sum squared resid 
Log likelihood 
F-statistic 
Prob(F-statistic) 

 
 

8)  Norilsk Nickel 

 
 

Variable 

 
 
C 

MICEX_NIK 

 
 

R-squared 
Adjusted R-squared 
S.E. of regression 
Sum squared resid 
Log likelihood 

 

Dependent Variable: RETURNS_NIK 
Method: Least Squares 
Date: 06/17/13   Time: 01:39 
Sample: 1 250 
Included observations: 250 

 
 
 
 
 
Prob.   
 
 
0.4187 
0.0000 
 
 

-0.001054 
0.025234 
-4.720743 
-4.692571 
-4.709404 
1.656249 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prob.   
 
 
0.0640 
0.0000 
 
 

0.000191 
0.019700 
-6.439726 
-6.411554 
-6.428387 
1.596120 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prob.   
 
 
0.7745 
0.0000 
 
 

0.000400 
0.015530 
-6.226661 
-6.198489 
-6.215323 

     45 

F-statistic 
Prob(F-statistic) 

 
 

9)  Polyus Zoloto 

275.2036     Durbin-Watson stat 
 
0.000000 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

Dependent Variable: RETURNS_POLZOL 
Method: Least Squares 
Date: 06/17/13   Time: 01:43 
Sample: 1 250 
Included observations: 250 

 

 
 

Variable 

 
 
C 

MICEX_POLZOL 

 
 

R-squared 
Adjusted R-squared 
S.E. of regression 
Sum squared resid 
Log likelihood 
F-statistic 
Prob(F-statistic) 

 

 
 
 
10) Sollers 

 
 

Coefficient 

 
 

0.000563 
0.864141 

 
 

Std. Error 

 
 

0.001859 
0.111194 

 
 

 
 

 
 
0.195840     Mean dependent var 
0.192597     S.D. dependent var 
0.029389     Akaike info criterion 
0.214204     Schwarz criterion 
528.0511     Hannan-Quinn criter. 
60.39620     Durbin-Watson stat 
0.000000 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

t-Statistic 

 
 

0.303104 
7.771499 

 
 
 
 
 
 

t-Statistic 

 
 

1.928176 
5.933731 

Dependent Variable: RETURNS_SOLLERS 
Method: Least Squares 
Date: 06/17/13   Time: 01:49 
Sample: 1 250 
Included observations: 250 

 

 
 

Variable 

 
 
C 

MICEXSOLLERS 

 
 

R-squared 
Adjusted R-squared 
S.E. of regression 
Sum squared resid 
Log likelihood 
F-statistic 
Prob(F-statistic) 

 
 

11) TMK 

 
 

Coefficient 

 
 

0.002043 
0.370963 

 
 

Std. Error 

 
 

0.001060 
0.062518 

 
 

 
 

 
 
0.124322     Mean dependent var 
0.120791     S.D. dependent var 
0.016735     Akaike info criterion 
0.069451     Schwarz criterion 
668.8391     Hannan-Quinn criter. 
35.20916     Durbin-Watson stat 
 
0.000000 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

Dependent Variable: RETURNS_TMK 
Method: Least Squares 
Date: 06/17/13   Time: 01:50 
Sample: 1 250 
Included observations: 250 

 

 
 

Variable 

 

 
 

Coefficient 

 

 
 

Std. Error 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

t-Statistic 

 

 

1.734859 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prob.   
 
 
0.7621 
0.0000 
 
 

0.000741 
0.032707 
-4.208409 
-4.180237 
-4.197071 
2.057426 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prob.   
 
 
0.0550 
0.0000 
 
 

0.002341 
0.017847 
-5.334713 
-5.306541 
-5.323374 
2.084213 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prob.   
 

     46 

 
C 

MICEX_TMK 

 

-0.000905 
0.752217 

 

0.001425 
0.085042 

 

-0.634970 
8.845209 

 
 

R-squared 
Adjusted R-squared 
S.E. of regression 
Sum squared resid 
Log likelihood 
F-statistic 
Prob(F-statistic) 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
0.239818     Mean dependent var 
0.236753     S.D. dependent var 
0.022530     Akaike info criterion 
0.125883     Schwarz criterion 
594.4979     Hannan-Quinn criter. 
78.23772     Durbin-Watson stat 
0.000000 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
0.5260 
0.0000 
 
 

-0.000744 
0.025788 
-4.739983 
-4.711812 
-4.728645 
2.264788 

 
 
 

 

     47 

Appendix C. Returns Distribution 

1)  Akron 

2)  Baltica 

 

3)  ChelPipe 

 

 

 

     48 

01020304050607080-0.10-0.050.000.050.100.15Series: RETURNS_AKRONSample 1 250Observations 250Mean       0.005614Median   0.000000Maximum  0.140371Minimum -0.093227Std. Dev.   0.026624Skewness   0.929518Kurtosis   7.112576Jarque-Bera 212.1801Probability 0.000000010203040506070-0.06-0.04-0.020.000.020.04Series: RETURNS_BALTSample 1 250Observations 250Mean      -0.001594Median  -0.000829Maximum  0.036796Minimum -0.068470Std. Dev.   0.012132Skewness  -1.347958Kurtosis   9.381986Jarque-Bera 499.9762Probability 0.0000004) 

Fortum 

5)  GUM 

 

 

 

 

 

     49 

05101520253035-0.06-0.04-0.020.000.020.040.06Series: RETURNS_CHELPIPESample 1 250Observations 250Mean       0.001087Median   0.000540Maximum  0.072519Minimum -0.071667Std. Dev.   0.021619Skewness   0.049847Kurtosis   3.889157Jarque-Bera 8.338940Probability 0.01546001020304050607080-0.06-0.04-0.020.000.020.040.060.08Series: RETURNS_FORTUMSample 1 250Observations 250Mean       0.000240Median   0.000000Maximum  0.087585Minimum -0.061065Std. Dev.   0.017836Skewness   0.900898Kurtosis   6.819345Jarque-Bera 185.7695Probability 0.000000010203040506070-0.10-0.050.000.050.100.150.200.25Series: RETURNS_GUMSample 1 250Observations 250Mean      -5.87e-05Median  -0.000159Maximum  0.256945Minimum -0.105572Std. Dev.   0.028651Skewness   2.749821Kurtosis   28.94400Jarque-Bera 7326.427Probability 0.0000006) IDGC 

7)  Lukoil 

8) NorNick 

 

 

 

 

 

     50 

051015202530-0.100-0.075-0.050-0.0250.0000.0250.0500.075Series: RETURNS_IDGCSample 1 250Observations 250Mean      -0.001054Median  -0.003325Maximum  0.086855Minimum -0.098911Std. Dev.   0.025234Skewness   0.018636Kurtosis   4.951186Jarque-Bera 39.67204Probability 0.000000048121620242832-0.08-0.06-0.04-0.020.000.020.040.06Series: RETURNS_LUKSample 1 250Observations 250Mean       0.000191Median   0.000498Maximum  0.069693Minimum -0.081382Std. Dev.   0.019700Skewness  -0.135772Kurtosis   3.964856Jarque-Bera 10.46545Probability 0.00533901020304050-0.04-0.020.000.020.040.06Series: RETURNS_NIKSample 1 250Observations 250Mean       0.000400Median  -0.000315Maximum  0.061252Minimum -0.046761Std. Dev.   0.015530Skewness   0.336022Kurtosis   4.983596Jarque-Bera 45.69057Probability 0.0000009) Polyus Zoloto 

11) Sollers 

12)  TMK 

  

 

 

 

     51 

020406080100120-0.3-0.2-0.10.00.1Series: RETURNS_POLZOLSample 1 250Observations 250Mean       0.000741Median   0.001463Maximum  0.165230Minimum -0.327832Std. Dev.   0.032707Skewness  -3.202174Kurtosis   45.60324Jarque-Bera 19333.87Probability 0.00000001020304050-0.04-0.020.000.020.040.060.08Series: RETURNS_SOLLERSSample 1 250Observations 250Mean       0.002341Median  -0.000707Maximum  0.076670Minimum -0.054465Std. Dev.   0.017847Skewness   0.826888Kurtosis   4.762092Jarque-Bera 60.83279Probability 0.00000005101520253035-0.075-0.050-0.0250.0000.0250.0500.0750.100Series: RETURNS_TMKSample 1 250Observations 250Mean      -0.000744Median   0.000132Maximum  0.102415Minimum -0.080911Std. Dev.   0.025788Skewness   0.189360Kurtosis   4.820290Jarque-Bera 36.00920Probability 0.000000