National Research University 
Higher School of Economics   

 
 
 
 

International College of Economics and Finance  

Diploma Thesis   

 
 

On a topic: 

“Uneven Influence of the WTO on Countries and Their Trade”  

 

 
Student of the 4th course, group  №2 
Evgeniya M. Rukavishnikova 

Scientific Supervisor Ph.D, 
Assistant Professor of Economics 
Roman L. Zakharenko 
 
 

Moscow, 2013 

1	  

 
 

 

 

 

	  

Всемирная Торговая Организация является одной из самых значимых и влиятельных 
структур  в  мире.  Число  стран,  находящихся  в  ВТО,  в  2013  году  составило  159.  Эта 
цифра составляет от 64% до 84% от общего количество стран (в зависимости от данных 
по  количеству  стран  в  мире).  Безусловно,  процесс  вступления  и  участия  в  этой 
организации  является  определяющим  в  дальнейшей  жизни  страны  и  именно  в  этом 
заключается  актуальность  исследования  неравномерного  влияния  ВТО  на  развитые  и 
развивающиеся страны.   

этого 

был 

для 

создан  принцип 

Как  и  ее  предшественник  ГАТТ,  ВТО  определила  развитие  и  рост  торговли  своей 
первичной  целью.  Именно 
«Наиболее 
Благоприятствуемой Нации», который обязывает все страны в составе ВТО применять 
одинаковый уровень тарифов на различные товары для всех своих торговых партнеров. 
Кроме  того,  правила  организации  включают  в  себя  предоставление  льгот 
развивающимся  странам  и  оказание  им  помощи  в  решении  целого  ряда  вопросов. 
Однако,  в  реальности  развитые  страны  оказываются  в  более  привилегированных 
условиях,  проводя  политику  «защитного  протекционизма».  Результатом  этого  стали 
завышенные  импортные  тарифы  в  богатых  странах  и  заниженные  в  бедных  и 
развивающихся, что и стало одной из ключевых причин различий эффектов ВТО. 

Главной  целью  данной  работы  является  исследование  различного  влияния 
Всемирной  Торговой  Организации  на  развитые  и  развивающиеся  страны  с  помощью 
изучения уже существующих работ и созданных эконометрических моделей. 

 
Для достижения цели были поставлены следующие задачи: 
1.  Изучить историю ВТО, ее основные принципы и правила; 
2.  Проанализировать преимущества и недостатки от вступления в ВТО; 
3.  Рассмотреть  различия  для  развитых  и  развивающихся  стран  и  выделить 
основные  сферы  влияния  благодаря  научным  источникам  и  собственному 
эконометрическому анализу. 

    
  Исследование  проводилось  с  помощью  вариации  гравитационной  модели  и 
регрессий, оцененных с применением процедуры взвешивания параметров. В качестве 
зависимых  переменных  использовались  импорт  и  экспорт,  а  также  их  модификации. 
Эконометрический  анализ  подтвердил  гипотезу  о  неравномерном  влиянии  ВТО  на 
развитые и развивающиеся страны.  

Данные  были  получены  с  помощью  баз  Международного  Валютного  Фонда, 

Всемирного Банка, UN Comtrade, а также CEPII. 

	  

2	  

	  	  

Contents 

Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 4 
1.The World Trade Organization ........................................................................................... 6 
1.1 History of the WTO .......................................................................................................... 6 
1.2 The Basic Principles and Goals of the WTO .................................................................... 7 
1.3 The Operational Structure of the WTO ............................................................................ 9 
1.4 The Future of the WTO .................................................................................................. 10 
2. World Trade Organization Accession .............................................................................. 11 
2.1 The Main Steps and Their Features ................................................................................ 11 
2.2 Why countries join the WTO? Advantages and Disadvantages ..................................... 13 
2.3 Difference of the WTO Influence for Developed and Developing Countries ................ 17 
3. Analysis of Research Papers and Existing Models .......................................................... 21 
4. Research and Econometric Analysis ................................................................................. 27 
4.1 Empirical Study. Part I: Gravity Model .......................................................................... 27 
4.2 Empirical Study. Part II .................................................................................................. 31 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................... 38 
References ................................................................................................................................ 40 
Results ...................................................................................................................................... 43 
Gravity model ....................................................................................................................... 43 
Cross-section weights model ................................................................................................ 48 
Appendices ............................................................................................................................... 52 
 

 

	  

3	  

Introduction 

 
The World Trade Organization is one of the most important and affluent structures in 
the  world.  Currently  it  has  159  members,  which  generates  from  64%  to  84%  of  the 
whole number of existing countries or territories. The percent varies due to the fact that 
some countries are not recognized as independent states and, for example, the United 
Nations  has  193  countries  in  its  list.  As  the  successor  of  the  General  Agreement  on 
Tariffs  and  Trade  (GATT)  the  WTO  continues  its  operation  and  manages  the 
international  trade  relationships  and  all  issues  connected  with  this  topic.  The  main 
declared goal of the organization is to promote trade for its members while providing 
assistance  to  countries,  contributing  to  the  development  process,  regulating  foreign 
economic relations and solving trade disputes. The accession process and the “game” 
according to the implemented rules are the inevitable parts of all countries in the XXI 
century. 

The significant role of trade dependence has been studied for many years. There is an 
indicator that shows the importance by the values of total trade (the sum of exports and 
imports)  divided  by  the  Gross  Domestic  Product  (or  sometimes  Gross  National 
Product).  Usually  small  countries  (or  countries  with  low  population)  have  high  trade 
dependence, which can reach the level of 90%. Developing countries are usually more 
export-oriented.1 

The significance of the international trade and the unchanged situation during several 
decades are the main stimulus of the research as joining the WTO as well as being its 
participant  has  uneven  effects  on  developed  and  developing  countries.  Different 
researches tell us that rich countries have a lot more benefits than poor ones. 

The  main  purpose  of  this  work  are  the  examination  of  the  WTO  influence,  the 
analysis of its key differences for developed and developing countries and the empirical 
results that will confirm my hypothesis of unequal effects. 

 
For the successful accomplishment of the goal following steps were made: 
 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 

Insight into the history of the WTO, its principles and rules; 
Study of the accession process; 
Analysis of the asymmetry between developed and developing countries; 
Consideration of existing models of the WTO effects on trade and countries; 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  Mikic M., Commonly Used Trade Indicators: A Note, ARTNeT Capacity Building Workshop on Trade, 2005	  
	  
4	  

Estimation  of  the  influence  and  disparity  between  developed  and  developing 

5. 
countries with econometrical models. 
 

Two  econometric  models  were  used  in  my  analysis.  The  first  one  was  based  on 
bilateral trade and the gravity model. The second model showed the effect on imports 
and exports and its modifications. 

The  results  of  both  models  coincide  with  my  hypothesis  as  the  influence  of  the  WTO 

differs for developed and developing countries and their trade. 

 

	  

5	  

1.The World Trade Organization 
1.1 History of the WTO 

 
In order to get the full understanding of the WTO influence and how it promotes trade in 
developing  and  developed  countries  the  more  precise  definition  of  the  organization,  its 
structure, approaches and aims should be given. 

 The idea of formation of some international organization, the mail goal of which would be 
the control of international trade, takes its roots from the Second World War. However, the 
process itself was quite long and hard and required a lot of modifications until the WTO was 
established  and  got  the  look  we  are  all  familiar  with.    In  1944  during  the  Bretton  Woods 
conference  with  the  help  of  the  USA  and  the  United  Kingdom  the  International  Bank  for 
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) were 
set  up.  One  more  important  result  was  the  new  economic  mainstay:  International  Trade 
Organization.  The  international  conference  in  1996  in  Havana  was  dedicated  to  trade  and 
employment. The statute and formal regulations (necessary substantive laws) were proposed. 
Most  of  them  were  connected  with  the  decrease  in  tariffs,  the  simplification  of  the 
international trade process and the easing of the customs burden for goods making their way 
from one country to another. 

In 1947 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was signed. Initially it was considered as 
only  a  part  of  the  broad-based  agreement  on  new  international  trade  organization.  Quite 
unexpectedly, Congress refused to ratify the statute of the ITO (despite the fact that the USA 
was the main driving force of this organization). As a result GATT acted as an independent 
unit without any strong base.  

During the years GATT showed itself as a quite dual system, which was able to reduce the 
customs duty from 40% in the mid 40s to almost 4% during the mid 90s. The significant part 
of GATT were systematically conducted trade rounds between countries-members. The goal 
of such meetings was the reduction of explicit customs duties and hidden non-tariff barriers 
on imports from abroad. The first round “Geneva” started on April 1946 with 23 countries 
and ended 7 months later with the signing of GATT and 45,000 tariff concessions. The last 
(which ended the life of GATT) took effect on September 1986 and lasted 87 months with the 
participation  of  123  countries.  The  disputes  consisted  not  only  of  tariff  and  non-tariffs 
measures  but  also  of  intellectual  property,  textiles,  agriculture.  The  main  outcome  of  this 
round  became  the  creation  of  the  WTO  in  19942.    Member  countries  came  to  a  consensus 
regarding trade of goods regulation. Moreover, due to the increasing role of services in the 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2	  The	  full	  information	  about	  rounds	  and	  its	  results	  can	  be	  found	  in	  Appendix	  
	  

6	  

postindustrial  society  and  its  significant  share  in  the  world  trade  the  new  agreement  was 
established. It was called “General Agreement on Trade in Services” (GATS) and addressed 
issues of this sphere of international trade. 

It is important to note that within this Marrakesh agreement (which gave birth to the WTO 
and GATS) went through the intellectual property agreement – TRIPS. Agreement on Trade-
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights controls trade issues connected with rights on 
creations  of  the  mind  (inventions,  arts,  literature  and  etc.)  and  nowadays  is  considered  the 
essential part of the legal base of the WTO. 

Thus, after almost 50 years of failed attempts to form international organization and the 
existence of the transitional GATT system from January 1st 1995 the WTO took up the reins. 
	  
1.2 The Basic Principles and Goals of the WTO 

 
After the deep analysis of different literary sources together with the official information of 
the  WTO  organization  I  would  like  to  briefly  outline  5  main  rules  of  the  international 
organization. 
1) 
The discrimination in the trading sphere is unacceptable. This can be combined with 
the “Most Favoured Nation” treatment (no discrimination for trading partners). It says that if 
the country grants another country a “special favour (such as a lower customs duty rate for 
one of their products)” it has to do the same for all other countries-members of the WTO.3 
Countries  are  not  eligible  to  infringe  on  the  rights  of  other  countries  while  imposing  any 
restrictions  on  exports  and  imports.  The  ideal  situation  can  be  described  as  the  one  where 
domestic market of any country makes no distinctions between conditions for domestic and 
foreign products. However, in the reality there is a rule about restrictions and protectionism, 
which partly contradicts this principle.  
2) 
Minimization of trade barriers. In other words this rule describes all factors that can 
possibly  decrease  the  potential  of  the  domestic  market  penetration  of  any  foreign  goods. 
Firstly, these barriers are any customs duties and imports quotas. Besides international trade is 
under an influence of administrative factors and politics of the exchange rates. 
3) 
Permanence  and  stability  of  trade  conditions.  Foreign  investors,  governments  and 
companies need some feeling of certainty that in the short-term or long-term perspective all 
terms and conditions of trade deals won’t be violated or changed unexpectedly. 
4) 
Maintenance of competitive stimulus. In order to observe fair trading and competition 
the use of all “unfair” methods of the competitive struggle should be crushed in the bud. For 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3	  wto.org	  (Principles	  of	  the	  trading	  system)	  
	  

7	  

example, export subsidies, dumping prices result in takeovers of new segments of the market 
or market channels overall. All these activities should be stopped and controlled. 
5) 
Exemptions  for  less  developed  or  developing  countries.  This  principle  is  in 
contradiction  with  other  rules  listed  above  as  there  are  certain  privileges  provided  by  the 
WTO for these countries and it is considered fair as especially developing countries find it 
really hard to compete with developed strong economies at first. This principle is necessary as 
it ensures involvement of weak undeveloped countries. This rule is quite promising for the 
developing countries. However, in the reality the situation is a little bit different. The analysis 
of the problem and its reasons will be provided later.  

One  of  the  important  goals  of  the  WTO  is  the  settling  of  disputes  and  the  mediation  in 
trade negotiations.  Experience has proven that the best way to solve international economic 
conflicts is to make decisions according to the established procedure of the WTO, which is 
based on the mutually agreed juridical base and which provides equal rights and opportunities 
to all countries-members. Decisions are made by all participating countries and the consensus 
method used in the process plays the role of the additional stimulus to the strengthening of 
relations and harmony in the organization. It can be considered an important difference from 
many  others  international  organizations  (the  World  Bank,  International  Monetary  Fund) 
where the power is delegated to the board of directors or the organization’s head.  

This all brings us to the discussions of the main functions of the WTO. They are: 
−  The control of the fulfillment of the basic agreements; 
−  The  formation  of  conditions  for  proper  negotiations  between  member  countries 

concerning issues of foreign economic relations; 

−  The settlement of disputes connected with trade and economic relations. It is important 
to know that several years ago several European countries as well as the USA tried to include 
working  conditions  to  the  list  of  topics  under  the  government  of  the  WTO.  However, 
developing  countries  were  against  this  change  as  they  considered  this  rule  as  the  cause  of 
decreased  welfare  of  workers  together  with  the  fall  in  workplaces,  incomes  and,  generally, 
competitiveness level; 

−  The control of politics of participating countries and their behavior while dealing with 

international trade issues 

−  Assistance and efforts in favour of developing countries; 
−  Cooperation with other international organizations.4 

 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
России”. Дашков и Ко, 2009, с.152 	  
	  

4 Горбунова О.А., Миченнкова И.В. “ВТО. Основы функционирования и проблемы присоединения 

8	  

 
1.3 The Operational Structure of the WTO 

	  

	  
The  decisions  of  the  highest  level  and  strategic  nature  are  made  by  the  Ministerial 
conference.  This conference is conducted minimum once a year. General Council that is in its 
submission is responsible for the performance of the current work. It gathers several times a 
year in headquarters in Geneva with the participation of all countries. Moreover, it controls 
two departments: first deals with the analysis of trade policy and the second one controls trade 
disputes. Special committees are also under the authority of the General Council. They tackle 
the  issues  of  finance,  restrictions  on  trade  balances,  trade  and  its  development  and 
administrative questions. 5 

The General Council also deals with the main disputes and has the exclusive authority to 
form arbitral groups with the aim of the analysis of conflicts, approval of reports and speeches 
as  well  as  keeping  under  observancy  the  execution  of  decisions  and  recommendations  and 
implementing sanctions in case of their non-execution. 

The General Council partially delegates its functions to three other councils, which appear 
one step below according to the official hierarchy of the WTO. These are Council for Trade in 
Goods, Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. 

Council for Trade in Goods controls the operation of the specialized committees that are in 
charge  of  the  WTO  principles  fulfillment  and  the  execution  of  GATT  goods  agreements. 
Council for Trade in Services manages the performance of the GATS agreements. The treaty 
consists  of  the  Committee  on  trade  in  financial  services  and  the  Working  group  on 
professional  services.  Council  for  Trade-Related  Aspects  of  Intellectual  Property  Rights 
regulates the execution of the TRIPS agreement as well as prevents trade conflicts, which are 
caused by the trade of counterfeit goods. 

The Secretariat of the WTO in Geneva has almost 500 regular employees. Its head is the 
director general. The Secretariat doesn’t have the power of making decisions because as we 
know it is given to the member countries. Among the main obligations of the Secretariat there 
are  provision  of  technical  support  to  various  councils  and  committees  as  well  as  the 
convention  of  the  Ministerial  conference,  provision  of  technical  assistance  to  developing 
countries, the conduction of the world trade review together with computation of its indicators 
and  the  communication  with  the  public  and  the  mass  media.  Moreover,  the  Secretariat 
provides some forms of legal aid to the countries that wish to join the organization. Today 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5	  	  Rukavishnikova E., ICEF Course Work: International Trade, the WTO and the Impact on Russia, 2012,p. 25-
29	  
	  

9	  

there are 25 countries that are considered observer governments. 6 
 
1.4 The Future of the WTO 
 

The future of the WTO is quite an urgent topic. Some believe that will show its strength, 
others see several key problems of the institution, which may prevent it from developing and 
only  structural  reforms  can  improve  the  situation.  Let’s  look  at  the  statistical  data,  which 
shows the volume of world trade and GDP for the period between 2005-2013.7 The changes 
can be seen on the figure 1.1. It should be noted that the values in 2013 are only predicted 
values.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

Figure 1. The growth of average export and GDP in 2005-2013 

According to the figure the volume of the world trade increased by 5% after the peak rise 
by 13.8% in 2010. Although before this there was record decrease of the world export by 12% 
in 2009 (counted from the times of the Second World War). Nowadays we can observe the 
increase in the export volume by 3.7%, which is smaller than the average level for the last 20 
years (5,5%) by 1.5 times. The WTO predicts that the size of the global economy will expand 
in 2013 by 2.1%. The value is a little bit smaller than the same indicator in 2012 (2.4%). It 
can be as some kind of a sign of a recession that is not going to stop in the nearest future. 

The recession in the euro zone was one of the main threats in 2012 that influenced world 
trade.  Together  with  the  government  debt  crises,  the  decrease  in  raw  materials  prices  and 
geopolitical  risks  it  deteriorated  the  trade  volume.  The  WTO  was  formed  by  developed 
countries, which thought that economic freedom in international trade plays the role of the 
collateral for economic growth and the increased welfare of the society. However, now there 
exist a lot of other alternatives of external economic relations (for example, bilateral relations 
between regions). 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7 http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/pres12_e/pr658_e.htm#chart1	  
	  

6 Sutirin S.F. WTO: The Mechanism of National Economy Interactions: Threats and Opportunities in Conditions 
of the International Market Accessio. Eksmo, 2008  

10	  

	  

2. World Trade Organization Accession 
2.1 The Main Steps and Their Features 

Let’s  examine  the  mechanism  of  the  accession  itself  together  with  its  main  steps.  The 
members of the WTO can be any separate customs territories and any countries of the world.  
As on March 6th 2013 the WTO has 159 participating countries. About 30 countries are on 
different stages of negotiations, which are connected with their future potential participation 
in this international organization. Most of countries in the past were the members of GATT. 
These  countries  form  the  “founding  members”  of  the  WTO  and  have  somehow  different 
rights and conditions, which we will discuss later. The process of the accession itself is often 
different and is based on different conditions, which are discussed by the member countries as 
well as the new states that would like to become a part of the WTO.  It’s also important to 
note that about two thirds of the members are developing or least developed countries. On the 
graph  2.1  you  can  see  the  number  of  participating  countries,  which  are  subdivided  by 
developed, developing and least developed ones. 
 

Table 1 Countries-members of the WTO by years, Source: wto.org, worldbank.org, Author's calсulations 

 

Year 

Number of countries 
Joined during the year 

Joined developed 

countries 

Joined developing 
countries (excluding 

LDC) 

1995 
112 
36 
5 

1996 
128 
16 
2 

17 

6 

 Joined LDC countries 

14 

8 

1997 
132 
4 
0 

3 

1 

1998 
133 
1 
0 

1 

0 

1999 
135 
2 
1 

1 

0 

2000 
140 
5 
1 

4 

0 

2001 
143 
3 
0 

3 

0 

2002 
144 
1 
0 

1 

0 

2004 
148 
2 
0 

2005 
149 
1 
1 

2006 
149 
0 
0 

2007 
151 
2 
0 

2008 
153 
2 
0 

2009 
153 
0 
0 

2010 
153 
0 
0 

2011 
153 
0 
0 

2012 
157 
4 
0 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

2 

 
Year 

Number of countries 
Joined during the year 

Joined developed 

countries 

Joined developing 
countries (excluding 

LDC) 

Joined LDC countries 

 

	  

2003 
146 
2 
0 

2 

0 

2013 
159 
2 
0 

2 

0 

11	  

In the table all countries are divided by three categories. However, usually in the analysis 
only  two  types  are  used:  developed  and  developing  countries.  It  is  important  to  say  that 
actually  all  LDC  countries  are  the  part  of  developing  countries.  Let’s  discuss  the  main 
differences of all three types and what main features each of them has.   

relative 

to  other 

technological 

infrastructure 

A  developed  country  “is  a  sovereign  state  that  has  a  highly  developed  economy  and 
less  developed  nations.” 
advanced 
(wikipedia.org)  Usually  in  order  to  determine  the  degree  of  economic  development  gross 
domestic  product  (GDP),  the  per  capita  income,  level  of  industrialization,  amount  of 
widespread infrastructure or general standard of living are used. Developed countries are on 
the stage of post-industrial economies (they are specialized in service sector more than in the 
industrial  one).  On  the  contrary,  developing  countries  are  only  in  the  process  of 
industrialization and quite often they are almost entirely agrarian.  According to the World 
Bank countries are divided with the use of their Gross National Income (GNI) per capita per 
year. Countries have a GNI of US$ 11,905 and less in 2010 are defined as developing ones.8 
The  WTO  itself  doesn’t  classify  countries  as  members  announce  their  decisions  by 
themselves. 

 Least  developed  countries  in  the  WTO  are  taken  from  the  classification  of  the  United 

Nations. In order to be considered least developed a country must satisfy 3 criteria:  

1. 

low-income  criterion  calculated  on  the  basis  of  three  years  the  average  estimate  of 
GNI per capita (gross national income), which should be lower than $750 and above $900 on 
order to graduate; 

2.  a  human  resource  weakness  criterion,  which  uses  Human  Assets  Index  made  of 

nutrition, health, education, adult literacy; 

3.  an economic vulnerability criterion that involves a composite Economic Vulnerability 
Index (EVI) based on agricultural products, population (its reduction because of disasters and 
logarithm  value  that  should  show  the  problem  of  economic  smallness),  exports  and  its 
deviations, the percent of manufacturing and modern services in Gross Domestic Product.9 

 
The process of the accession is very complicated and can take a lot of time. The shortest 
period  was  for  Kyrgyzstan  and  lasted  for  2  years  and  10  months.  The  longest  ones  were 
experienced by Russia and took 19 years and 2 months, Vanuatu (17 years and 1 month) and 
China (15 years and 5 months). The average time of accession is about 5 years. Everything 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9 www.un.org	  
	  

8  The International Statistical Institute (www.isi-web.org) 

12	  

depends  on  the  position  of  the  observer  country  and  a  huge  amount  of  negotiations  and 
commitments can be undertaken before all conditions will be satisfied. 

The  first  step  is  the  request  made  by  the  government.  It  has  to  present  a  memorandum, 
which will show all aspects of trade and economic policy that is connected with the WTO 
agreements.  The  memorandum  is  the  base  for  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  request  within  a 
special  working  party.  The  government  also  conducts  negotiations  with 
interested 
governments  that  are  current  members  of  the  organization.  During  these  negotiations  all 
goods obligations and trade-offs of an applicant show up as well as obligations regarding the 
service market. This period of bilateral discussions is also essential for estimating benefits for 
member countries, which they will get from the new state. After the consideration of a trade 
regime of the observer state and negotiations about market accession are finished the working 
party lists the key conditions of joining the WTO. In the conclusion the General Council and 
or the Ministerial conference announce the implications of the working party, which are made 
as  a  substantive  report,  a  project  protocol  of  the  joining  procedure  and  agreed  lists  of 
obligations  and  trade-offs.  In  the  case  when  two  thirds  of  the  participating  countries  agree 
with  these  documents  then  the  applicant  can  sign  the  protocol  and  join  the  WTO  after  the 
ratification of this document by a parliament or another legislative organ if applicable. 

 

2.2 Why countries join the WTO? Advantages and Disadvantages 

 
Generally speaking, the participation in the WTO as in any other international organization 
has its advantages and disadvantages. The official cite shows and briefly outlines a variety of 
pluses:  peace, disputes, rules, cost of living, choice, incomes, growth and jobs, efficiency, 
lobbying  and  good  government.  The  same  is  written  about  developing  countries  with  the 
additional benefits such as longer transition periods and technical assistance. However, not 
everything is so simple and clear as member countries suffer from the trade-offs they have to 
admit and unequal conditions.10 

Studies and researches made on the topic of developed and developing countries usually 
examine the benefits of accession from two sides: business enterprises that export goods and 
services and affairs that import raw materials, goods and services, which are necessary for the 
production of export goods. 

In  order  to  prevent  potential  changes  in  trade  of  goods  almost  all  customs  duties  of 
developed countries and the significant part of developing countries’ tariffs (as well as tariffs 
of countries with transitional economy) are interrelated. This “tying-up” provides the stability 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10	  wto.org	  
	  

13	  

and  the  situation  when  the  easy  access  to  a  market  (made  available  because  of  decreased 
tariffs)  will  not  be  violated  as  the  consequence  of  the  sudden  rise  in  duties  or  of  the 
establishment of new restrictions by importing countries. Obligations regarding services are 
also restricted by the limits of conditions and engagements that are recorded in the national 
list of obligations. 

The  system  of  the  WTO  guarantees  the  stability  of  access  to  export  markets  as  the 
organization  requires  the  same  rules  on  the  boarder  for  all  participants.  These  rules  help 
exporters to eliminate different standards that appear on different markets and make the life of 
producers  much  harder.  Apart  from  this,  the  guaranteed  access  to  markets  gives  exports 
industries an opportunity to form expectations for investment and production plans with the 
higher degree of certainty.  

Generally speaking, many developing countries of Latin America, South-East Asian and 
East Asian countries were able to increase the industrial production as well as exports. As the 
result their economies grew quite rapidly with the help of market opportunities of developed 
countries. The World Bank analysis of the developing countries has showed that the share of 
countries has significantly increased and its future perspective is also quite delightful. As we 
can see from the figure below the proportion of international trade generated by developing 
countries was only 22% in 1980. However, there has been a gradual growth (of 23% for 50 
years) and the predicted value of 2030 is 12.15 trillion of dollars made only by developing 
countries, which is 45% of the whole volume of trade in this year. 

 

 

Figure 2  Total exports of developed and developing countries 
(US $). Source: worldbank.org 

     The legal system of the WTO also secured the rights for entrepreneurs. These rights can 
be divided into two parts. The first one consists of the rights, which domestic producers and 
importers  get  with  respect  to  the  government.  The  second  one  involves  the  rights  of 
producers-exporters regarding the protection of their interests in the cases when governments 
of  countries-importers  try  to  decrease  their  exports  volumes.  As  the  result,  the  decrease  in 
barriers  with  the  aim  of  free  exchange  of  goods  ensures  economic  benefits.  Moreover,  the 

14	  

	  

WTO  system  positively  influences  politico-social  atmosphere  in  countries-members  of  the 
organization  and  consequently  by  this  increases  the  welfare  of  an  individual  citizen.  Apart 
from this, the growth of export of domestic production is an impulse to the rise of the income 
of producers. The higher income results in higher tax revenues that in their order increase the 
welfare  of  a  country.  Of  course,  this  chain  works  only  in  the  ideal  situation  and  in  many 
developing countries because of their political system people don’t see the increased level of 
welfare. 11 

While talking about the welfare it’s important to note that the benefit of free trade is the 
decreased level of the cost of living, which happens not only because of decreased values of 
imported goods due to lower barriers but also because of reduced prices on domestic goods 
the  production  of  which  uses  imported  components.  Another  advantage  is  the  expanding 
variety of available goods and services. It makes the choice much wider.  

If we talk about the rise of the government income then it should be said that the operation 
of companies-exporters help to redistribute received additional resources and provide help to 
domestic companies, which face a dangerous level of foreign competition, as well as expand 
the volumes of production and development of firms-exporters’ competition. 

Long-term effects are represented by the increase in the employment level. This change 

dominates in industries that deal with export.  

The trade and economic situation are inseparably connected with political system. The free 
trade has several positive results in this sphere. The government has more potential to resist 
the lobby groups and their actions as the trade policy is conducted according to the interest of 
economy in the whole.12 Besides, free trade is the key reason for more balanced decisions of 
political  matter,  the  struggle  with  corruption  and  the  effective  changes  in  the  legislative 
branch. All these fact will positively affect the investment inflow to the country.  

Finally, the country, which enters the WTO, gets the right to vote and participate in trading 
disputes while acting with respect to its national interests. As there are 159 countries now in 
the  WTO  and  this  number  generates  more  than  90%  of  the  world  international  trade  this 
chance  to  be  a  part  of  it  is  important  in  order  to  develop  and  improve  the  reputation  of  a 
country in the world as well as to establish strong trade and political relations. 

Even though there are many advantages from the WTO accession there also quite many 
disadvantages.  Let’s  list  and  examine  them  while  simultaneously  making  distinctions  for 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  
	  

11 Царева А.Б. “Интеграция российской экономики в ВТО” . Внешнеторговое право,2009 №5.  С. 4-10. 
12 Шувалова М.А. “Проблемы и перспективы России при вступлении в ВТО ” . Экономика России: ХХI 
век., 2010 № 5(296). С. 16-23. 

15	  

developed  and  developing  countries.  Many  people  consider  the  WTO  organization 
fundamentally undemocratic and not so transparent as it is presented. Not so many industries 
and their interest are taken into account and affect trade negotiations. Many disputes are made 
exactly for corporations and provide the most beneficial conditions only for this “group” of a 
country.  Various  labour  organizations  as  well  as  consumers,  environmental  problems  and 
human rights are quite often partly or completely ignored. As there is also inequality in the 
conditions and participation rights of different countries mostly developed and rich ones have 
advantages from the free trade while other ones become less and less safe and their power 
decreases. We’ve already discussed that joining the WTO increases competition and variety 
(which  is  a  good  thing)  but  it  also  is  a  stimulus  for  a  reduction  in  wages  or  “race  to  the 
bottom” as it is called by specialists. Workers get worse conditions instead of international 
labour standards promised to them. There is also a problem with a child labour as rules of the 
WTO do not control it and governments do not forbid goods that are produced with the work 
of children. Once again human rights are also not identified anywhere, which is a great minus 
as the behaviour of companies and labour conditions are not under control in some countries 
or not under the necessary attention and consideration.  

 One  more  drawback  is  the  privatization  as  many  essential  services  (energy,  water  and 
education) by the rules of the GATS should be made private. These are “elder and child care, 
sewage,  garbage,  park  maintenance,  telecommunications,  construction,  banking,  insurance, 
transportation, shipping, postal services, and tourism”13 . There are about 160 services in the 
list. Generally speaking, all of them should be given to private foreign corporations and some 
countries  already  implement  these  rules,  which  can  be  destructive  to  a  high  share  of 
population. 

Other problems also include the environment. As many rules and laws that tried to improve 
the situation were cancelled. For example, “US Clean Act” that forced domestic and foreign 
producers  to  use  cleaner  gasoline  and  the  “Endangered  Species  Act”,  which  tried  to  save 
some animals were eventually abolished. Thus, nature and its resources are under the danger.  
The  WTO  membership  also  weakens  economic  sovereignty  and  the  government  cannot 
make  decisions  only  by  itself.    As  a  result  companies  that  use  domestic  labour  force  (for 
example)  or  domestic  benefits  by  the  laws  of  the  WTO  must  not  have  any  subsidies  or 
benefits. Of course, it worsens the conditions for many local firms. One more serious flaw is 
the “infant industry argument”. Countries do not have rights to protect industries, which only 
start  to  develop  and  need  this  protection  for  successful  operation.  They  may  be  quickly 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  

13 Zettel M. “The GATS, Privatization and Water Services An Overview of Legal Services” .Maastricht Working 
Papers, the Faculty of Law, 2009 

16	  

defeated  by  large  foreign  manufactures.  In  the  short-run  people  lose  their  jobs  (because  of 
foreign and domestic competition) and the unemployment rate increases. 

Now  I  would  like  to  outline  the  main  disadvantage  that  is  examined  in  this  work:  the 
inequality of developing and developed countries that only increases because of the WTO. A 
lot  of  people  criticize  the  World  Trade  Organization  for  some  kind  of  discrimination  for 
developing  countries  even  though  initially  it  was  declared  as  the  one  of  the  goals  of  the 
organization. On November 14th 2001 the promising response to the anti-globalisation rights 
was  adopted  by  the  Ministreal  Declaration.  However,  if  we  look  at  developing  countries 
nowadays,  we  will  see  that  most  of  them  have  not  developed  a  lot  and  are  dropped  from 
decisions and disputes processes by powerful and rich countries.  
 
2.3 Difference of the WTO Influence for Developed and Developing Countries 
 

Several spheres that show the position of developing countries have been examined. First 
of, all tariffs and barriers are quite often one-sided, which means that developed countries use 
restrictions and developing ones have to decrease or eliminate them completely. For example, 
due to some questionable rules several poorest countries in Africa cancel all tariffs for 90% of 
the trade. 

In  addition,  there  are  agricultural  subsidies  to  “rich  world  farmers”,  which  make  their 
production  and  distribution  process  much  easier  while  many  local  farmers  of  developing 
countries  cannot  enter  or  stay  on  the  market  because  of  this  enormously  high  level  of 
competition. 

During the 9th Doha round there were negotiations regarding the access of poor countries 
that mainly locate in the South to the agricultural market of the Northern countries, which are 
considered rich. However, all discussions failed because the farmers of developed countries 
have strong political power and do not want the reduction of import tariffs to happen. The 
same happens with the cotton industry where more than 5 million small businesses of local 
farmers and their families left the market. The reason for this large shutting down was the 
payment of 47 billion of dollars as subsidies to developed countries producers. Undoubtedly, 
all  these  policies  do  not  give  ordinary  poor  farmers  the  chance  to  succeed  and  stay  as 
producers. 14 

Developing countries allowed the introduction of many unequal measures that completely 
erased the correct notion of “reciprocity”. For example, the bank system as both developed 
and developing countries have the right to open their banks (a restricted amount of branches 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
14	  guardian.co.uk	  
	  

17	  

and banks) in other countries. However, it is clear that the number of transactions of some 
rich developed country bank is several times more than the amount of transactions of a group 
of banks of a developing country. Thus, not the right factor is being controlled as the number 
of transactions is far more important than the number of banks.  The same shortcomings are 
connected  with  e-commerce  and  information  technology  goods  as  developing  countries 
agreed with the terms of 1996 and 1998 negotiations and by this decision of eliminating any 
duties in this sphere deprived developing countries from a substantial part of revenues.  

Moreover,  TRIPS  and  numerous  patents,  trademarks  and  other  regulations  brought 
incredible  damage  to  many  countries  (especially,  developing  ones).  The  pharmaceutical 
companies are protected from any decrease in profits and use of their medicine. However, a 
lot of common people in poor countries (Africa or Asia-Pacific where more LDC countries 
are  situated)  die  each  year  because  of  the  shortage  of  medicine.  Although  there  was  a 
significant  change  in  2001  when  developing  countries  got  the  rights  to  produce  or  import 
generic drugs but the problem has not been completely overcome. 

Besides, developing countries and especially least developed ones do not have the same 
voice in the whole decision making process as developed ones and their problems are quite 
often unheard.  The cost of appearing on the stage of recommendations and findings is very 
high for many developing countries. Thus, they usually need a lot of time and effort to make 
claims or participate in negotiations (for example, protect themselves) and again developed 
countries are in a better position as for them this process is not so costly (in relative terms). 
Developing  countries  are  always  quite  vulnerable  because  they  cannot  fully  participate, 
struggle  for  their  rights  and  observe  other  countries’  obligations  but  if  they  do  and  try  to 
increase their role, the expenses may be so high that risks connected of being victimized will 
stop the rational government.  

Even  in  the  beginning  of  the  WTO  when  it  provided  developing  countries  with 
opportunities of market accession and “Most Favoured Nation” treatment many of them were 
unable to use this advantage as their supply capacity was on such low level. So their income 
and  welfare  stayed  on  the  same  level,  which  shows  the  uneven  effects  of  the  WTO  on 
developed  and  developing  countries.  Those  who  were  able  to  take  the  advantage  of  all 
measures soon faced the problem of increased protectionist tendencies in developed countries. 
These  restrictions  and  quotas  touched  not  only  textiles  industry  (right  after  Multi-Fiber 
Arrangement  was  established  and  limited  the  number  of  exported  textiles  from  developing 
countries). Quite similar limits were imposed on leather and jute products. All industries that 
were occupied by developing countries and that were hope to the economic improvement of 
developing  countries  step  by  step  were  seriously  controlled  and  changed  according  to  the 

	  

18	  

interest of rich and powerful countries. All the anti-dumping measures, all restrictions, tariffs 
and quotas only show that the system and trade is not so free and liberal as it seems from the 
first sight.   

As  developed  countries  affected  the  decisions  and  results  in  the  past  now  they  try  to 
broaden the spheres of the WTO influence and some of them were initially quite unrelated to 
the GATT agreement and trade itself. The environment, investment and other innovations of 
the  WTO  may  even  worsen  the  conditions  of  developing  countries.15 It  sounds  particularly 
strange if we look at the number of developing countries (115) and the number of developed 
countries  (43)  together  with  Macao  and  Hong  Kong  though  generally  they  are  the  part  of 
China  and  the  European  Union  is  excluded  as  it  is  the  entity,  which  presents  developed 
countries that are already in the list). Actually there is some discrepancy in the data as, for 
example,  the  World  Bank  has  one  classification,  the  UN  list  has  another  division.  My 
classification was based generally on the World Bank list. 

 Partly this situation was caused by the behavior of developing countries as they gave no 
response and not participated in some important disputes. There can be different reasons for 
such attitude:  

−  Some countries may think that subjects of these negotiations are in no way related to 

the their problems and development; 

−  There  is  some  misunderstanding  because  of  the  huddle  of  claims  and  topics  and 
countries prefer to stay aside rather than be involved without consciousness of the situation 
(and by this eliminate the damage of the reputation); 

−  Countries  understand  issues  and  their  negative  consequences  but  choose  not  to 
confront developed countries (because this opposition may bring even more problems in the 
future); 

−  There  is  a  false  impression  that  some  other  developing  countries  will  negotiate  and 
defend the interests of all/many developing countries and, thus, many of them decide to inflict 
subjects on more active members, which often prevents the right process of disputes in the 
WTO. 

Many  of  these  mistakes  and  shortcomings  that  may  have  been  eliminated  if  developing 
countries were more integrated into the process, if they were able to cooperate and fight for 
their rights even though much effort and money should be spend. There also should be some 
kind of body, which will look after common interests and positions of developing countries. 
With its successful operation they will make claims and objections and while being supported 
with the most members (and as we know the number of developing countries in the WTO is 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
15	  Michalopoulos	  C.	  “Developing	  countries	  in	  the	  WTO,	  Palgrave”,	  2001	  
	  

19	  

much  greater  than  the  number  of  developed  ones)  will  achieve  their  aim  and  won’t  be 
discriminated in any sector. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

	  

20	  

(!"#$!,!)!

 

3. Analysis of Research Papers and Existing Models 
 

The great amount of literature is dedicated to the topic of the WTO influence. Different 
analyses  were  made.  Some  scientists  considered  the  impact  on  a  particular  country,  others 
subdivided countries into groups and investigated the effect of the organization. There is no 
agreement on the issue of the World Trade Organization effect. Some say that it is generally 
positive as the WTO promotes trade, others found some positive as well as negative moments 
and the disparity in developing and developed countries or even the failure of the organization 
and its inability to provide declared opportunities. 

The  difference  of  methodologies,  models,  dependent/independent  variables,  dummy 

variables and their number are all important factors in the evaluation process.  

The most widely used econometric model is the gravity model.  
The first scientist that used the gravity model in the analysis of international trade was Jan 
Tinbergen  and  in  1962  he  explained  bilateral  trade  flows  using  the  “Newton’s  law  of 
gravitation” and the formula: 
 

!!,!=(!"#!)!×(!"#!)!

 
It  shows  that  trade  flows  are  directly  related  to  GDP  of  each  country  (A  and  B)  and 

inversely related to the distance between A and B. All powers are approximately equal to 1.  

Though the author provided only intuitive explanation, his work considered significant part 
of international trade studies as the gravity model proved its stability for different countries 
and different times.16 

As  there  are  a  lot  of  modifications  different  assumptions  and  propositions  were  made. 
Some  used  in  derivation  the  Ricardian  model,  others  the  Hecksher-Ohlin.  There  were  also 
different  assumptions  about  prices,  “multilateral  resistance”  concept,  utility  functions  and 
demands.  

In 2002 David D. Li and Changqi Wu made an event study in order to explore the actual 
topic of the WTO influence. They took 74 countries that were the members of GATT/ WTO 
in the time period from 1960 to 1998 and 38 that are not. Together with the main point of 
investigation the authors showed that the openness of a country alone could not guaranty the 
growth of a country and with this result opposed the view of Adam Smith.  

The results are quite similar to the topic of my work as scientists proved by their analysis 
that high-income countries have large positive effects after the accession, while the growth of 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
16	  Tinbergen, J. “Shaping the World Economy. Suggestions for an International Economic Policy”, 1962	  
	  

21	  

the developing countries is not so significant. The growth appears in many spheres: export, 
import,  FDI  and  etc.    The  division  criterion  was  GDP  per  capita  and  if  it  was  higher  than 
3,000  $  in  1987  than  the  country  was  moved  to  the  developed  group.  One  more  division, 
which  is  less  relevant  to  our  discussion,  is  conducted  by  the  law  system  (common  law, 
European  law  and  formerly  socialist  systems).  European  law  countries  benefited  the  most 
from 
as: 

!"#!!" =!!+
!! is  fixed  effect  coefficient  for  a  economic  variable !,  j  shows  the  type  of  economy 
(developed/developing,  the  type  of  the  law  system), !!   the  coefficient  for  capturing 
endogeneity, !! shows  the  normal  growth  of  a  country,  T  is  a  time  trend,  Selection  is  the 
selection method and !!" is the error term. 

!!!!

accession. 

looks 

the 

!!!!+!!  !"#"$%&’(!"+!!!"#!"!!"##$!"+!!"

regression 

itself 

The 

 

The  growth  of  developed  country  was  about  1.5%  per  year  for  the  next  10  years  after 
joining the WTO, the growth of developing countries was insignificant, the import and the 
export rose for developed countries at a rate 5% per year and again export increased by 1% 
and  the  import  appeared  not  significant  for  developing  countries.  However,  the  stock  of 
capital showed the inverse results: 4.5 % increase for low-income countries and 1% for high-
income countries. Foreign direct investment increased significantly in both countries 

The modern version of the gravity model was provided by Anderson and van Wincoop17. 
They were the ones who proved that “the empirical gravity equations do not have a theoretical 
foundation”. In order to correct these limitations they added “multilateral resistance”. Price 
indices are tightly connected with bilateral resistance as any restrictions immediately affect 
prices.  Moreover, they solved the McCallum puzzle (which got that trade inside Canada was 
22 (16) times more than the trade between Canada and the USA in 1988 (1993)). They key to 
the  solution  is  the  fact  that  the  border  factor  is  asymmetric  and  on  “small”  countries  its 
influence  is  much  higher  together  with  the  omission  of  some  variables.  The  gravity  model 
used by scientists is based on CES utility function and goods differentiated by place of origin.  
The  most  significant  work  in  this  sphere  belongs  to  Andrew  Rose.  His  work  “Do  We 
Really Know that the WTO Increases Trade?”18 in 2002 was studied and cited a great amount 
of times as many scientists adverted to it afterwards.  He used more than 175 countries and 
fifty  years  together  with  the  gravity  model.  His  model  included  many  dummy  variables 
(distance,  colony,  FTA,  GSP,  language,  WTO  member  and  etc.)  and  the  average  value  of 
exports and imports as the resulting value.  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Economic	  Review,	  2003,	  p.170-­‐192	  
17	  Anderson J.E.., van Wincoop E.	  “Gravity	  with	  Gravitas:	  A	  Solution	  to	  the	  Border	  Puzzle”	  The	  American	  
18	  Rose Andrew K.	  Do	  We	  Really	  Know	  that	  the	  WTO	  Increases	  Trade?,	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  2004	  
	  
22	  

The main result that the scientist got was that the WTO has no significant effect on trade of 
a  country  despite  the  common  perception  even  though  the  model  worked  pretty  well  and 
showed significant positive results for “richer and more developed countries” and significant 
negative results for the distance, the fact that can be drawn out by the common sense. The 
author modified the types of analysis, added more dummy variables, divided countries into 
groups,  identified  and  excluded  regional  trade  agreements  but  no  fundamental  change 
occurred  and  the  coefficients  were  still  negative  and  insignificant.    Nevertheless  one  quite 
important fact was revealed: GATT founding members (one from the pair/ both from the pair) 
increased  trade  significantly,  which  may  be  a  good  indicator  of  different  conditions  for 
countries that joined the WTO in different years and those who were among the organizers 
and  first  members.  One  more  important  result  is  the  significant  influence  of  the  WTO  on 
industrialized countries (t-statistics is 2.11, which is significant at 4% significance level) and 
the pair of industrialized countries-members of the WTO trades 60% more than the pair of 
non-members. 

The Rose’s paper touched off disputes and new researches. The main critics are connected 
with the dependent variable ln(trade) (as the average of exports and imports doesn’t show the 
direction of trade, which is relevant in this case), the endogeneity of the WTO variable, the 
omission of “multilateral resistance” variable, the measurement errors and some mistakes in 
the  data.  Rose  himself  talked  about  the  missing  data  (for  example,  missing  trade  data  and 
missing  “regressor”  data).  He  also  stated  that  the  WTO  effect  is  great  (345%)  if  essential 
variables  are  dropped  (GDP  and  distance)  and  treated  his  outcome  as  “an  interesting 
mystery”. 

After this paper Rose wrote some other works connected with the WTO influence: “Which 
International  Institutions  Promote  International  Trade?”19.  In  this  paper  he  investigated  the 
relative power of the WTO and found it to be weaker than OECD and relatively the same as 
IMF; “Does the WTO Make Trade More Stable?”20: showed the non-volatility of trade of the 
countries that joined GATT/WTO.  “The Effect of Membership in the GATT/WTO on Trade: 
Where Do We Stand?” (the latest work of Rose). It can be perceived as the correction and 
deeper investigation of some errors made in 2002. He emphasized questions of “inappropriate 
pooling of data”, “inappropriate econometric techniques, especially fixed effects, “selection 
bias”. All these things were criticized in his work in 2002. However, his view on the issue 
hasn’t changed with the new paper as he still doesn’t get results of significant influence.21 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
20 Rose A. K.  “Does the WTO Make Trade More Stable?”; Open Economies Review; 2005	  
	  

23	  

19  Rose A. K. “Which International Institutions Promote International Trade?”;Review of International 
Economics; 2005 

21 Rose A K., The Effect of Membership in GATT/WTO on Trade: Where Do We Stand?. Unpublished Draft 

Arvind Subramanian and Shang-Jin Wei were one of the first who reacted to the Rose’s 
work.22 They  got  exactly  the  opposite  results  that  the  WTO  positively  influences  countries 
and the additional volume of trade could reach the size of 120%. However, this effect varies 
for  industrial  (developed)  and  developing  countries  as  well  as  for  different  industries  as  in 
some of them the tariffs were reduced and brought benefits and for others the restrictions and 
fight  with  them  was  unsuccessful  (textiles,  agriculture,  clothing-all  goods  exported  by 
developing countries). The activity rate of a member country, its ability to negotiate tariff cuts 
and “reciprocal liberalization” are also very import for its future. One more thing, which has 
been discussed in this work, were unequal conditions for initial and subsequent countries as 
the  later  ones  joined  the  WTO  after  1994  and  were  forced  to  liberalize  their  trade  more 
seriously than initial participants of the WTO. I would like to concentrate on the asymmetry 
between developed and developing countries as it is tightly connected with the topic of this 
paper. It is said that developed countries through the negotiation process were able to reduce 
tariff barriers of developing countries by 10.5 % from 1947 to 1995. The key differences from 
the Rose’s work is the use of the imports and it is more consistent with the theory and fixed 
effects while using Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) who proposed the fixed effect for a 
country that imports and the other one that exports. Subramanian and Wei took “multilateral 
resistance”  on  a  new  level  by  making  the  time-varying  effects  for  a  panel  data.  This 
innovation made it possible to eliminate GDP, GDP per capita and land area variables. 

They affirmed that for developed country the trade increases by 68.2% or (!!.!!−1). The 

developing  country  has  an  average  coefficient  of  0.28,  which  means  that  on  average  the 
volume of trade is higher by 30%. However, this effect works on countries that joined the 
WTO in 1990s (during the Uruguay round) and became more open in 10 years. 

Xuepeng Liu in 200723 also showed the importance of the WTO accession with the data 
from 1993 to 2003. He claimed that not only old trade partnerships were made stronger but 
also many new relationships appeared among countries. The first thing is called the intensive 
margin and the second has the name of extensive margin. His work is interesting because Liu 
decided to include all zero observations in the data (unlike Rose or Subramanian and Wei). 
The one-directional trade was calculated as N*(N-1) with N being the number of participating 
countries  and  two-directional  as  the  fraction  of  N*(N-1)/2  with  no  missing  import  data 
included. His analysis showed 40% rise during 53 years in one-directional calculations and 
46%  growth  for  the  same  time  period  of  a  two-directional  trade.  His  changed  technique 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  

22 Subramanian A., Wei S.-J., “The WTO Promotes Trade, Strongly But Unevenly”. Journal of International 
Economics, 2007 
23 Liu X., “GATT/WTO Promotes Trade Strongly: Sample Selection and Model 
Specification”. Review of International Economics, 2009 

24	  

helped him to overcome some calculation errors in the Rose’s work. It also brought the author 
to the use of Poisson model for the gravity model estimation that is more suitable with high 
frequency of zero observations.  

The author mentions Silva and Tenreyro (2006)24 who the first ones to prove this choice of 
model  to  be  better  for  solving  heteroskedastic  and  non-normal  issues  with  maximum 
likelihood estimation. The panel data was constructed for 210 countries and the imports was 
also  used  as  the  dependent  variable.  The  gravity  model  is  quite  standard  with  some 
modifications such as the inclusion of “alliance” and “hostility” used as additional variables. 
The “index of multilateral resistance” (Anderson and Wincoop (2003)) here has a proxy of: 

!"#$%"!"#=(

!!!

!"#$%&’(!"
!"#!"
!"#!"
!!!

)(

!!!

!"#$%&’(!"
!"#!"
!"#!"
!!!

) 

Where i and j are two countries and t is time. 

fixed effects.  

In all three cases the Hausman test, which compares random and fixed effects, votes for the 

The results are the following: 60% (!!.!"−1) increase if both countries become members 
of the GATT/WTO and 23% (!!.!"−1) if only one partner is in the organization with 30% 

being the extensive margin and 70% the intensive one. 

Quite  similar  analysis  was  made  by  Gabriel  Felbermayr  and  Wilhelm  Kohler  in  200625. 
They  investigated  that  with  the  Tobit  and  Logit  estimations  the  WTO  raised  trade  and 
particularly  affected  the  extensive  margin  of  trade  (mainly  due  to  decreased  costs  of 
international trade). Their key result is the corner solutions for the gravity model. The authors 
also  examined  the  question  of  zero  values.  If  both  countries  participate  in  the  WTO,  the 

coefficient before the variable !!"# (which is 2 if there is export from at two countries from the 
pair) increases by 15% compared to the case when !!"#=0. The econometric analysis used 

bilateral exports in the role of dependent variable. While using the common regression of the 
log-gravity  model  no  significant  results  were  found.  However,  the  Tobit  model  gave 
significant results of about 156% if both countries are in. The Logit results were smaller (only 
10% growth). 

Pao-Li  Chang  and  Myoung-Jae  Lee  in  201126 used  the  new  approach  to  the  estimation 
process.  They  based  on  the  nonparametric  evaluation  and  permutation  tests  as  the 
conventional  gravity  models  had  some  misspecifications  (omission  of  relevant  relations). 
Then the Rosenbaum(2002) sensitivity analysis was applied. It investigates how unobservable 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
24	  Silva	  J.,	  	  Tenreyro	  S.	  “The	  Log	  of	  Gravity”.	  The	  Review	  of	  Economics	  and	  Statistics,	  2006	  
25	  Felbermayr	  G,	  Kohler	  W.	  K.	  “Does	  WTO	  Membership	  Make	  a	  Difference	  at	  the	  Extensive	  Margin	  of	  
World”.CESifo	  working	  paper,	  №	  1898,	  2007	  
26	  Chang	  P.-­‐L.,	  Lee	  M.Y..	  The	  WTO	  Trade	  Effect,	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economic,	  2011	  
	  

25	  

variable/factor  can  influence  the  treatment.  The  authors  used  the  Rose’s  date  (although 
Subramanian  and  Wei  found  some  mistakes  in  the  information).  The  dependent  variable  is 
also  the  same  ln(trade).  Chang  and  Lee  made  use  of  the  notion  “dyad”,  which  actually 
describes two partner countries. During the analysis they dropped some “poor” matched pairs. 
Once again their results showed that the WTO promotes trade strongly. For example, if both 
countries  are  the  members  of  the  GATT/WTO  the  trade  volume  rises  to  224%  from  53%. 
However,  they  agreed  that  there  might  be  some  errors  with  the  effect  of  the  WTO  and  its 
significance as different sectors are treated in the different way, some countries liberalize their 
trade  without  joining  the  WTO  and  some  other  reasons.  For  robustness  checks  the  authors 
implemented restrictions on the same dyads, same year, different rounds of negotiations and 
developed  versus  developing  countries.  It  helped  to  eliminate  heterogeneity  and  showed 
difference  between  developing  and  developed  countries  as  positive  effects  prevail  in  high-
income and middle-income countries and low-income countries do not see any great changes. 
Chang and Lee outlined the high level of protectionism in developed countries that makes it 
hard for developing to export goods. 

Quite different work was written by Ana Cecilia Fieler27. She used the limitations of the 
standard gravity model: its assumption that trade increases with total income even though in 
the reality it increases with income per capita and doesn’t have significant changes because of 
the population. The Ricardian model was proposed in the paper. However, with only one type 
of  good  available  it  transforms  to  Eaton  and  Kortum  and  shows  the  gravity  model.  The 
author’s work includes a lot of quantitative analysis. The countries are divided into poor and 
rich and two factors of production (labour, which moves freely between types of goods but 
not across countries, and technology that is completely mobile). Fieler got results that poor 
countries  prefer  to  consume  domestically  as  the  domestic  market  provides  the  lowest  cost 
while rich countries trade more and pay attention to barriers and wages. Moreover, from the 
data  the  significant  result  from  the  income  per  capita  can  be  seen.  After  the  quantitative 
comparison of “integrated model” and the gravity model the author stated that the first one is 
better as the gravity model (or Eaton- Kortum model) can explain the trade between OECD 
countries but doesn’t work so well with the trade between countries of different income. The 
integrated model proposed by the author is able to work with all data. 

	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
27	  Fieler A.C. “Nonhomotheticity and bilateral trade: Evidence and a quantitative explanation”. Econometrica, 
2011	  
	  
26	  

 
 

4. Research and Econometric Analysis 
4.1 Empirical Study. Part I: Gravity Model 

	  After	  the	  deep	  analysis	  of	  different	  research	  papers	  I	  decided	  to	  start	  my	  empirical	  
work	  with	  the	  gravity	  model	  with	  the	  panel	  data.	  
My	  hypothesis	  is	  that	  the	  WTO	  has	  an	  uneven	  effect	  on	  developed	  and	  developing	  
countries.	  
For	  the	  dependent	  variable	  I	  decided	  to	  use	  imports	  as	  according	  to	  the	  theory	  this	  
indicator	  is	  more	  appropriate	  for	  the	  regression	  and	  generally	  organizations	  are	  more	  
interested	  in	  import	  and	  its	  tariffs.	  
The	  data	  was	  gathered	  from	  different	  sources.	  The	  data	  on	  bilateral	  import	  was	  
gathered	  from	  the	  UM	  Comtrade	  database,	  the	  whole	  information	  connected	  with	  the	  
dummy	  variables	  was	  taken	  from	  the	  CEPII	  Gravity	  Dataset.	  The	  division	  of	  countries	  
into	  developed	  and	  developing	  ones	  was	  made	  according	  to	  the	  World	  Bank	  database	  
and	  its	  classification.	  The	  data	  of	  the	  WTO	  accession	  is	  taken	  from	  the	  official	  site	  of	  the	  
organization.	  
The	  sample	  of	  all	  214	  countries	  is	  used.	  Values	  are	  in	  real	  terms.	  The	  analysis	  covers	  
the	  data	  from	  1960	  to	  2010.	  The	  number	  of	  observations	  equals	  to	  76094.	  After	  the	  
comparison	  of	  different	  studies	  made	  by	  scientists	  I	  chose	  the	  method	  used	  by	  
Subramanian	  and	  Wei	  and	  also	  divided	  the	  periods	  of	  five	  years.	  My	  main	  goal	  was	  to	  
develop	  the	  difference	  between	  developing	  and	  developed	  countries,	  which	  became	  the	  
members	  of	  the	  WTO	  and	  the	  gravity	  model	  (that	  is	  used	  mostly	  by	  everyone	  and	  is	  
subject	  to	  minor	  changes	  in	  different	  works)	  was	  my	  first	  step.	  Subramanian	  and	  Wei	  
got	  significant	  results	  both	  for	  developing	  and	  developed	  countries	  at	  5%	  significance	  
level	  and	  as	  I’ve	  already	  said	  that	  for	  developing	  countries	  this	  result	  was	  negative	  and	  
for	  developed	  ones	  positive.	  These	  results	  coincide	  with	  my	  hypothesis.	  
	  The	  gravity	  model	  used	  in	  my	  analysis:	  
	  
!"!"#$%&!"# =!+!1  !"#$%&’()  +!2  !"#$%#&’  +!3ln!"#$!"
+!!  !"#.!"##$%&’()*  +!!!"#"$%!"+!!!"#.!"#"$%!"#+!!!"#!"$"%&!"
+!!!"#"$%&!"#$%!"#+!!!"#!"#+!1  !"#"$%&"’−!"#$%&  
+!2  !"#"$%&’()−!"#$%&  +!!"#	  
	  	  

	  

27	  

− 

− 

− 

− 
− 

− 
− 

!"#$%&!"#-­‐	  is	  the	  volume	  of	  import	  from	  one	  country	  to	  another	  at	  time	  t;	  
!"#$%&’!"	  -­‐the	  dummy	  variable	  that	  has	  the	  value	  of	  1	  if	  countries(i,	  j)	  	  have	  the	  
!"#$%#&’-­‐	  the	  dummy	  variable,	  which	  has	  the	  value	  of	  1	  when	  countries(i,	  j)	  	  have	  
!"#$%&’()	  –	  is	  the	  natural	  logarithm	  of	  the	  distance	  between	  two	  countries(i,	  j);	  
!"#.!"###$%&’()*-­‐	  the	  dummy	  variable	  that	  shows	  whether	  the	  countries(i,	  j)	  	  
!"#"$%!"  -­‐	  the	  dummy	  variable	  that	  has	  the	  value	  of	  1	  for	  countries	  (i,	  j)	  that	  have	  
!"#.!"#"$%!"#	  -­‐	  the	  dummy	  variable	  that	  has	  the	  value	  of	  1	  if	  countries(i,	  j)	  	  are	  
!"#!"$"%&!"	  -­‐	  the	  dummy	  variable	  that	  has	  the	  value	  of	  1	  if	  countries(i,	  j)	  have	  
!"#"$%&"’()*!"#-­‐	  the	  dummy	  variable	  that	  shows	  has	  the	  value	  of	  1	  if	  the	  
!"#!"#	  -­‐	  the	  dummy	  variable	  that	  shows	  whether	  the	  country	  is	  in	  Free	  Trade	  
!"#"$%&"’−!"#$%&-­‐	  the	  dummy	  variable	  that	  shows	  the	  developed	  importer	  of	  
!"#"$%&’()−!"#$%&	  -­‐the	  dummy	  variable	  that	  shows	  the	  developing	  importer	  

same	  language,	  otherwise	  0;	  
a	  common	  border,	  otherwise	  0;	  
are	  the	  members	  of	  the	  Currency	  Union	  (with	  the	  value	  of	  1);	  
ever	  been	  in	  colonial	  relationships;	  
now	  in	  colonial	  relationships;	  
common	  colonizer	  after	  1945;	  
developed	  country	  grants	  GSP	  preferences;28	  
Agr.	  
the	  WTO;	  
of	  the	  WTO.	  
	  

− 

− 

− 

− 

− 

In order to eliminate heteroskedasticity I use robust standard errors. Table 1.1 shows all 
results. The regression has 11 independent variables and 3 of them are insignificant. They are: 
common  language  (t=-1.87),  current  colonial  relationships  (t=1.51)  and  common  currency 
(t=-1.35).  Even  though  language  and  currency  appear  to  be  insignificant  in  the  theory  I 
expected positive coefficients. Log of distance also has a negative significant influence, which 
is  quite  natural  as  when  the  distance  between  two  countries  increases,  it  becomes  more 
difficult to trade (higher shipment costs, longer time and etc.) Border, colony, ever in colonial 
relationship, FTA and developed country in GSP have positive significant coefficients (which 
is expected).  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
28	  It means that developing countries have preferential tariff rates (reduced or completely eliminated) on the 
	  

markets of developed countries. 

28	  

While talking about developed and developing countries my hypothesis is supported by the 
model:  a  WTO  developed  importer  has  a  significant  (at  all  significance  levels)  positive 
coefficient (t=37.51).  A WTO developing importer has a significant (also at all significance 
levels)  negative  coefficient  (t=-39.85).  It  means  that  after  the  developed  country  joins  the 

WTO  its  trade  increases  by !!.!"#−1  or  by  246%  and  the  developing  country  has  a  sharp 
!"#!= !!!!!!.  The critical value of VIF is usually 5 or 10. All VIFs in this regression are a 

As there are actually a lot of regressors the multicollinearity may arise. In order to control 
this  problem  I  used  the  VIF  (Variance  Inflation  Factor)  test.  The  VIF  test  is  computed  as 

reduction of 65.2%.  

little more than 1. Thus, there is no pattern of multicollinearity. (The VIF results are shown on 
Table 1.2) 

In order to double check the collinearity problem I made correlation matrices separately for 
language,  distance  and  border  as  one  group  and  common  colonizer  after  1945,  current 
colonial relationship as another group. All results were normal and, thus, there is no sign of 
correlation. (See Tables 1.3(a) and Table 1.3(b)). As wee can observe from Table 1.3 (a) the 
correlation  between  log(distance)  and  border  is  negative  (-0.4211)  as  well  as  between 
log(distance) and common language (-0.1335). These values are expected as if the distance 
between countries increases the possibility that they have common border reduces and almost 
disappears  after  some  time.  The  same  happens  with  languages.  Usually  neighbouring 
countries have common language. For example, Belgium, France and Switzerland both speak 
French and Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia all speak Arabic. However, as many developing and 
LDC countries were/are colonies of rich countries some languages may be met far away from 
their  motherlands.  French  is  the  official  language  in  Chad,  Djibouti,  Equatorial  Guinea; 
English is spoken in Belize, Guyana, Cameroon.  

Table  1.3  (b)  also  shows  the  negative  correlation  between  variables  of  current  colonial 
relationship,  common  colonizer  and  ever  in  colonial  relationship.  The  correlation  between 
common colonizer and current colonial relationship is very low and can be approximated -
0.01.  Thus,  there  is  almost  no  correlation.  The  same  insignificant  value  of  correlation  is 
between common colonizer and ever in colonial relationship (-0.0482). The current colonial 
relationship and ever in a colonial relationship has a higher positive correlation about 0.3. It is 
easily explained by the fact that some current countries (colonies and colonizers) are included 
in the ever colonial relationships. However, the relationship is not strong and should not be a 
problem 

29	  

	  

I’ve  also  decided  to  test  the  joint  significance  of  cultural  variables  (common  language, 
current colonial relationship, common colonizer and ever in colonial relationship) is shown 
with Table 1.4 (the chi-squared is value is used). As the P-value is about 0 then Ho of no 
significance is rejected and we can conclude that cultural specificities generally promote trade 
(imports). 

Afterwards  the  problem  of  endogeneity  was  considered.  As  fixed  effects  together  with 
instrumental  variables  are  methods  to  solve  this  problem  for  the  comparison  of  fixed  and 
random effects I used the Hausman test. My P-value is almost zero, thus, the right choice is to 
use the model with the fixed effects. Logically it is also more correct as the model with fixed 
effects helps to control for various shocks (that can happen quite frequently in international 
economics and trade) and also to eliminate the decrease in estimated parameters because of 
independence  rules  of  the  error  term.  However,  the  fixed  regression  in  this  case  drops  all 
constant  in  time  dummy  variables  (distance,  language,  border,  common  colonizer  and  ever 
colonial  relationship).  Precisely  speaking,  these  variables  can  be  called  control  variables. 
Table 1.5 shows all results for 3 regressions. With fixed effects some coefficients change their 
signs but the most important fact for us are developed and developing countries. Both in fixed 
and  random  effects  a  developed  country  has  a  small  (insignificant)  reduction  of  the  WTO 
effect.  However,  developing  country  has  a  positive  effect  from  the  WTO  accession  (even 
though it is smaller than of a rich country). With fixed effects it is 33.6% and with random 
6%. Nevertheless, I decided to use Hausman-Taylor regression, which gives the opportunity 
to  estimate  constant  variables  and  endogenous  variables.  The  constant  was  suppressed,  the 
fixed  through  time  dummies  were  language,  common  colonizer,  colony,  distance  and 
border29. I suspected that FTA can endogenous and actually many researches were made on 
this topic30. (Table 1.8 shows all data) 

The results I got are different from the standard log-linear regression in common language, 
common currency and developed/developing countries. Common language and currency now 
have  positive  coefficients,  which  coincides  with  the  theory  as  these  two  indicators  should 
promote trade. The common currency is significant at any level while common language is 
significant  at  5%  and  insignificant  at  1%.  Developed  countries  increase  their  imports  by 
approximately 218%, developing countries has growth of 16%.  

Summing up, the analysis of the gravity model has shown that the effect of the WTO on 
the developed and developing countries is indeed uneven. With the standard log-linear model 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
International Economics, 2003	  
	  

29 Developed/developing dummies were also tested as endogenous and the results almost don’t differ from the 
case when only FTA is endogenous. 
30 Baier S. L, Bergstand J. H. “Endogenous Free Trade Agreements and the Gravity Equation”. Journal of 

30	  

developing  countries  even  lose  when  the  join  the  organization  (about  65%  decrease  in 
imports). However, the endogeneity problem actually misrepresented some coefficients and, 
thus, by controlling endogenous and fixed through time dummy variables the true coefficients 
were  estimated.  The  difference  for  developed  and  developing  countries  is  very  big  (202%) 
and it proves my hypothesis.  

The  next  step  of  my  empirical  work  was  the  estimation  of  regressions  that  showed  the 
general  level  of  imports  and  exports  of  a  country  (and  not  bilateral  trade).  I  tried  to  move 
away from the standard gravity estimation and use new methods. 

 

4.2 Empirical Study. Part II 

 
After  the  analysis  of  many  research  papers  and  the  first  part  of  the  empirical  study 
significant results were obtained. In order to have more detailed, extensive and deep analysis 
of the topic under consideration I decided to switch my work to another model that can be 
more  innovative  and  show  some  new  results.  After  the  goal  was  set  I  considered  a  great 
amount of variants. The specific nature of the topic under discussion (the uneven influence of 
the WTO on developed and developing countries) assumed the use of the panel data, precisely 
speaking the balanced data because not so many countries joined the organization in the last 
few years. A panel is said to be balanced if the number of time periods t=1,…,T is the same 
for  each  cross  section  observation.  It  has  many  advantages  and  usually  is  a  good  tool  to 
eliminate heterogeneity and the noise made by it. All models are estimated with the cross-
section  weights,  which  is  a  good  way  to  eliminate  the  problem  of  heteroskedasticity. 
Regarding the problem of the endogeneity, the use of the model with weighted weights on the 
spatial data provides the exogeneity of variables. 

 
The following indicators of export and import were used as the resulting variables: 
1.  Export volume index31  
2.  Import volume index 
3.  The growth of exports 
4.  The growth of imports 
5.  The value of exports (computed in US dollars; prices of the year 2000) 
6.  The value of imports (computed in US dollars; prices of the year 2000) 

 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
31	  The index is computed as the percent that is the change (stimulated by the export change with fixed price) of 
the last year	  
	  
31	  

In this part of the analysis I included both exports and imports as the dependent variable in 
order to see separate effects. Moreover, although in many works imports is used and it is said 
that  countries  are  more  concerned  with  its  tariffs  and  other  restrictions  other  scientists  use 
exports as it doesn’t include cost insurance freight (as imports) and includes tax on exports 
and exports subsidy because it is measured by the free in board method. Some of the resulting 
variables were also used as the explanatory variables. For example, the export volume index 
is  affected  by  the  import  volume  index.    The  relationship  between  exports  and  imports  is 
controversial  as  Husted  in  2002  examined  the  quarterly  trade  data  of  the  U.S.  and  found 
significant slope coefficient. This result coincides with the theory as export and import should 
converge.  However,  the  research  of  Fountas  and  Wu  in  2009  showed  no  significant 
correlation in the long-run. 32  Thus, I try to shed the light on this relationship. 
 
Besides, many other variables were used: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 

GDP per capita (computed in US dollars; prices of the year 2000) 
The urban population share in the whole population 
The growth rate of the urban population 
The dummy variable that shows whether the country is developed or not 
The dummy variable that shows whether the country is the member of the WTO 
The variable that shows for how many years the country is the part of the WTO 

 
At a later stage the total population, migration and the GDP of the neigbouring countries 
were also included. (Not all of them will be shown in the analysis due to the poor quality of 
models.) 

The data on imports and exports is taken from the IMF World Economic Outlook Database 
April 2013, the GDP was obtained from the World Bank database as well as IMF. Migration, 
urban  population  were  also  taken  from  the  World  Bank,  the  information  of  the  country 
accession was taken from the official site of the WTO. 33 

As  it  was  already  said  the  classification  of  countries  was  made  according  to  the  World 
Bank division. It has 4 groups: low income groups whose GNI per capita is $1,025 or less 
than this value, lower middle income ($1,026 - $4,035), upper middle ($4,036 - $12,475) and 
high income, which is equal or bigger than $12,476. The indicator was calculated in 2011. 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  

32 Mukhtar T., Rasheed S. “Testing Long Run Relationship Between Exports and Imports: Evidence from 
Pakistan”. Journal of Economic Cooperation and Development, 2010, p. 41-58 
33 wto.org 

32	  

  The  developed  countries  are  countries  with  the  high  income,  other  are  considered 

developing.34 

 The data was gathered for the time period between 1960 and 2012 for all 214 countries 
(these are countries that have the population of more than 30,000) that exist nowadays. Not all 
data  was  included  in  the  model  as  some  of  it  didn’t  fit  the  balanced  model.  However,  the 
included data is enough to give consistent results.  

In  the  beginning  many  models  were  developed  for  the  6  dependent  variables  already 
mentioned  above.  For  each  of  the  variable  the  best  model  was  chosen  according  to  the 
significance of its explaining variables. The decision of the combination of used independent 
variables was made with the elimination method (one or more variables was excluded and the 
new regression was estimated). 

 
All models have the following specification: 

!!"=!!"!!"+!!"!!"+!!" 

 

where !!" is the dependent variable, !!" is the vector of independent variables, !!" is the 
vector of the dummy vatiables and !!" is the normally distributed error term. 
!"#$%!"=!1!"!"#!"+!2!"!"#$"%!"+!1!"!"#$"%&’ℎ!"+!2!"!"#$!!"+!3!"!"!#$!"+!!" 

I 

 

 

The first model uses the export volume index as the dependent variable and there are 5 
independent variables: dummy that shows that the country is developed, the WTO member 
dummy, years of the WTO membership,  urban population growth and import volume index. 
All  coefficients  can  be  seen  in  the  regression  analysis  from  Table  2.1.  The  export  volume 
index (the change in exports volume because of the sales with fixed prices) is positively and 
significantly affected by the import volume index and the years of the WTO membership: t-
statistics is 15.32 and 11.55. Urban population growth has a negative effect on the dependent 
variable. It can also be said that the share of urban population is stable for several decades and 
deviates quite a little in developed countries and developing countries have high increase in 
the urban population that doesn’t stop and so their exports may also decrease because of it. 
The WTO membership generally decreases the level of export volume index (the t-statistics is 
-3.2).  The  dummy  that  shows  the  effect  of  the  developed  country  shows  that  the  export 
volume index increases and it is significant at 5% but won’t be significant at 1% level. Thus, 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
34 http://data.worldbank.org/	  
	  

33	  

if we use 1% significance level we should say that there is no significant difference between 
developed and developing countries. However, at 5% developed countries have good benefits. 
The main result is that when the developed country joins the WTO it loses only 2.411 (which 
is really small compared to the 4,863.953) and if the developing country joins the WTO the 
decrease  will  be  noticeable  as  relative  to  it  before  the  WTO  accession  it  is  a  significant 
reduction. However, after some time there can be some gain for the developing country as the 

WTO years variable is significant and positive.  !! is 0.625, which is generally a good sign. 
	  
	   !"!#$!"=!1!"!"#!"+!2!"!"#$"%!"+!1!!!"#$"%&’ℎ!"+!2!"!"#$!!"+!3!"!"#$%!"+!!"	  
	  

II 

	  

The second model switches places of exports and imports and now the imports variable is 
dependent and the exports variable is independent. The Table 2.2 has all results. As we can 
see  all  coefficients  are  significant  at  all  significance  level.    Here  the  developed  country 
dummy has a negative significant influence on imports (t-statistics=-14.537) as well as urban 
population growth (t=11.67). Nevertheless, developed countries then improve their position as 
the years of the WTO membership has a significant positive influence, too (however, quite a 
long period of time will be required). The developing countries increase their level of imports 

volume index after the accession and during the years it only rises. !!=0.752, which is high. 

The results that are obtained from the first two regressions are quite connected with the 
analysis  made  in  the  theoretical  part.  As  generally  developed  countries  quite  often  make  it 
hard for developing countries to enter rich countries’ markets and their level of exports are 
often less than of the developed countries and the level of imports can be higher. Though, if 
we compare these results with the gravity analysis, we will find that they are opposite and 
imports of developed countries is generally significantly higher than of developing countries. 
Although  from  the  international  economics  theory  we  should  remember  that  if  the 
country’s imports increases and its exports decreases (or even stays the same) then the current 
account decreases, which means that the aggregate output falls. There may be an expectation 
of the growth in short-term but in the long-run it can bring a lot of problems as it can increase 
the  country’s  credit  risk  and  eventually  the  economic  situation  in  the  country  may  sharply 
decrease (foreign investors will reduce the demand on the country’s assets as investment may 
be  not  profitable)  and  country’s  currency  will  depreciate.  Thus,  these  2  models  show  that 
developed countries are in a much better situation after the WTO accession then developing 
countries.   
 

34	  

III and IV 

!"#!"=!1!"!"#!"+!2!"!"#$"%!"+!1!"!"#$"%&’ℎ!"+!2!"!"#$!!"+!3!"!"!#!!"+!!"	  
	  
I	  combined	  these	  models	  because	  both	  of	  them	  appeared	  to	  be	  worse	  than	  Model	  1	  
and	  Model	  2.	  
The	  third	  model	  (that	  explains	  the	  growth	  of	  exports)	  has	  three	  insignificant	  
variables	  at	  5%	  sign.	  level	  (developed	  dummy,	  the	  WTO	  membership	  dummy	  and	  the	  
years	  of	  the	  membership)	  and	  all	  of	  the	  variables	  are	  insignificant	  at	  1%	  level.	  	  !!	  is	  
0.038	  ,	  which	  is	  very	  low.	  Except	  the	  years	  of	  the	  WTO	  all	  other	  coefficients	  have	  the	  
same	  sign	  of	  the	  regression	  as	  the	  exports	  volume	  index	  and	  they	  are	  insignificant	  
anyway.	  The	  Jarque-­‐Bera	  test	  shows	  that	  the	  error	  term	  is	  not	  normally	  distributed.	  
Thus,	  this	  model	  shouldn’t	  be	  used.	  
	  !"#!"=!1!"!"#!"+!2!"!"#$"%!"+!1!"!"#$"%&’ℎ!"+!2!"!"!"!!"+!3!"!"#$%!"+!!"	  
	  

The  fourth  model,  which  shows  the  growth  of  imports,  is  a  lot  better,  however,  the 
significance of all coefficients is lower than in the model with the imports volume index. The 
years of the WTO is the only insignificant variable and all coefficients except it coincide the 
ones  in  the  first  model.  The  coefficient  of  the  developed  country  is  again  negative  and 
significant,  which  means  that  if  the  developed  country  enters  the  WTO  its  import  will  be 
much less than the imports of the developing country and the years spend in the WTO don’t 

mean change anything. !! is again quite low (only 0.538). 
describe the low value of !!. 

The problem with these two models (especially the Model 3) can be in the fact of some 
volatilities in inflation, exchange rates and other not controlled by us factors and it can also 

 

The log(exports) and log(imports) appeared to be the best specifications and among many 

models I chose 4 (2 for exports and 2 for imports in order to briefly outline their results). 

	  

V	  and	  VI	  

	  
	  
	  

In order to examine different approaches I eliminated the developed dummy and tried to 
use GDP per capita. It is not a perfect substitute since the division was made according GNI 
per  capita,  which  is  based  on  ownership  and  GDP  is  calculated  basing  on  ownership. 
However, in V and VII models I assumed that these two indicators are the same. 

35	  

	  !"#(!"!")=!1!"!"#$"%!"+  !1!"!"#!"!!"+!2!"!"#$!!"+!3!"log  (!"#_!"#_!"#$%")!"+!!" 
	  
The specification differs from others and its !! is about 0.96, which is extremely high (and 

it  is  suspicious)  and  the  error-term  is  not  normal  at  all.  Its  coefficient  of  the  WTO 
membership  is  positive  and  significant  (t=336.79),  urban  population  growth  has  a  negative 
influence  on  exports.  The  years  of  the  WTO  membership  coefficient  is  also  positive  and 
significant and the logarithm of GDP per capita is also very significant and its t-statistics is 
equal  to  124.  The  coefficient  is  0.997,  which  means  that  with  the  increase  of  1%  of  this 
independent variable the exports increases by 0.99%.  

 !"#(!"!")=!1!"!"#$"%!"+  !1!"!"#!"!!"+!2!"!"#$!!"+!3!"log  (!"#_!"#_!"#$%")!"+!!" 

 
      The  regression  has  the  same  results  as  the  exports  one  and  all  coefficients  are 
approximately the same (signs are also the same). The coefficient before GDP per capita is 
0.9, which means that with 1% increase in it the imports increases by 0.9%. (t=120.62). Here 
developed countries have benefits. 
  
While comparing the models with and without developed dummy I chose the one with it as it 

has  normal !! (not  too  high)  and  normal  distribution  of  the  error  term.  This  factor  is  very 
	  

important  as  no  substantial  conclusions  can  be  done  if  the  error  term  has  skewness  and 
kurtosis.  
 

	  

!"#(!"!")=!1!"!"#!"+!2!"!"#$"%!"+  !1!"!"#!"!!"+!2!"log  (!"#_!"#$ℎ)!"+!!"	  

VII  

 
This specification includes the new variable that shows GDP of neigbouring countries. The 
data  was  gathered  separately  for  each  country  and  4  neigbouring  countries  were  used.  In 
general most of these neighbours have common borders with a country of interest. However, 
in some cases other independent states were chosen according to the distance (in km) if there 
weren’t enough “border neighbours”. There should be a positive effect from this indicator as 
richer and more developed neighbouring countries increase the potential trade opportunities 
as generally trade for smaller distances is bigger (these countries as well may have common 
language and other similarities).  

36	  

All coefficients except the WTO membership are positive and all of them are significant. 
GDP of neigbours has the value of 0.536 and t-stat=22.62. The one 1% increase in the total 
GDP of neghbouring countries will give 0.53% rise in exports. These numbers are consistent 
with other assumptions of positive influence. Once again for a developed country the process 
of joining the WTO won’t be noticeable as its coefficient is only -0.2584. However, for the 
developing country it may significantly deteriorate exports as relative to its all other values it 

is a big change and its exports will fall by 25%. !! is 0.759, which is a good sign. All results 
!"#(!"!")=!1!"!"#!"+!2!"!"#$"%!"+  !1!"!!"!"!!"+!2!"log  (!"#_!"#$ℎ!)!"+!!" 

can be seen in Table 2.7. 

 

VIII 

 
The imports model also has all significant coefficients and all positive except the WTO 
membership (t=-14.73). The dummy for a developed is also significant and its t-stat is equal 
to 15.29.  GDP of neigbouring countries is positive and significant (0.525) and t=22.44. Again 
1% rise in total GDP of neigbours increases imports by 0.52%. 

	  

It is important that here the developed dummy has a positive coefficient (it is implausibly 
big and it is not so in the reality). However, these results are the same as in the gravity model 
regression and developed countries benefit more. 

	  	  	  	  	  I’ve also tried to include the migration, the average time of export and import shipments 

but the data is available for some years only and, thus, the small number of observations can 
be used (about 200). All variables (or most of them) were insignificant.  

All specifications of models have enormously big coefficients of the developed dummy. It 
could happen because of the different measurement units or because of the specification of the 
used  models.  During  the  analysis  the  value  of  the  coefficient  wasn’t  so  much  taken  into 
account  as  generally  it  was  important  to  show  the  effects  of  the  WTO  on  developed  and 

developing countries and their difference, which was presented by these models.	  	  	  

	  

37	  

Conclusion 
	  

The main goal of this paper was to show uneven effects of the WTO on developed and 
developing  countries.  In  this  research  the  history  of  the  WTO  together  with  its  main  rules 
(non-discrimination,  the  reduction  of  all  tariffs  and  restrictions,  stable  trade  conditions, 
competition maintenance and development and privileges for less developed countries) and 
functions (control of trade agreements, settlement of disputes, assistance for less developed 
countries, cooperation with other international organizations and provision of conditions for 
trade) were outlined and discussed. The WTO accession process and membership were also 
examined with its advantages and disadvantages. The important section of the main spheres 
and changes that occur under the pressure of the organization were discussed.  

As  it  was  said  not  only  developed  countries  are  guilty  of  the  unequal  conditions  of 
developing  countries  in  the  World  Trade  Organization  but  to  some  extent  developing 
countries by themselves were not so initiative and didn’t assert their rights. As a consequence 
the  minimization  of  tariffs  and  import  customs  duties  led  to  lost  opportunities.  Quite  often 
rich countries kept and still keep some restrictions regarding the poor35 countries and, thus, 
the later ones cannot export their goods and services in the amount that the true “free” trade 
should  give.  These  restrictions  are  particularly  connected  with  textiles,  farmers.  Another 
important problem are TRIPS as patents on medicine, for example, kill millions of people, 
especially  in  least  developed  countries.  We  can  observe  that  “Most  Favoured  Nation” 
treatment is not followed in the reality. However, developing countries have the reason for 
this “inactive” behavior as sometimes costs of these negotiation processes are so high that it is 
not rational for them to get into this business.  

Research  papers  examined  in  this  work  also  showed  different  effects  on  developed  and 
developing  countries  whether  imports  or  exports  were  taken  as  dependent  variables.  On 
average if the developed country joins the WTO its imports rises by 200%. The situation with 
exports is approximately the same. The specificity of these results is that most of them were 
obtained from the bilateral trade analysis and the use of the gravity model.  

The empirical analysis of the bilateral trade conducted in this paper also shows that the 
effects on developed and developing countries are not the same. By this my hypothesis was 
confirmed.  The  gravity  model  and  its  regression  showed  that  the  imports  of  the  developed 
countries significantly increases compared to changes in the developing countries. 

The second part of the analysis included the simple regressions of the balanced panel data 
with cross-section weights and exports/imports as the resulting variables. The originality of 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  

35 Here “poor countries” means developing countries. 

38	  

this method consists of the fact that it shows the trade with the whole world (differs from the 
gravity analysis of the bilateral trade) and uses some new variables such as urban population 
share, GDP of neighbouring countries and etc. With its help the asymmetry of the effects was 
also displayed. However, here the exports generally increased significantly for a developed 
country and decreased for a developing one and the imports showed the opposite situation. 
Thus, developing countries benefited as importers but lost a lot as exporters. The results can 
be influenced by the specificity of the model. Anyway the goal to show the uneven effect of 
the World Trade Organization was successfully achieved.   

The quantitative examination in the sum brings to a conclusion that developing countries 
should fight for their rights, try to strike equal conditions and be more active participants. If 
developed countries reduce or completely eliminate their tariffs then developing ones will be 
able to increase their exports, which should be under their special control. The key point is 
that if a country joins the WTO it doesn’t mean that immediately everything will worsen or 
become better. The important factor is the economic policy of a country as the WTO is only a 

39	  

“tool” in its hands.	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

 	  	  	  	  
	  

Горбунова  О.А.,  Миченнкова  И.В.  “ВТО.  Основы  функционирования  и 

Дюмулен И.И. “Всемирная торговая организация” . М.: Экономика, 2009.  С. 58 
Кузнецова,  И.  П.  “Всемирная  торговая  организация:  функции,  проблемы, 

Шувалова  М.А.  “Проблемы  и  перспективы  России  при  вступлении  в  ВТО” 

Царева  А.Б.  “Интеграция  российской  экономики  в  ВТО”  Внешнеторговое 

References 
 
1. 
проблемы присоединения России”. Дашков и Ко, 2009, с.152 
2. 

3. 
перспективы”. ЭКО, 2006  
4. 
Экономика России: ХХI век., 2010. – № 5(296). С. 16-23. 
5. 
право,2009. – №5.  С. 4-10. 
6. 
Puzzle” The American Economic Review, 2003 
7. 

8. 
Equation”. Journal of International Economics, 2003 
9. 
Perspective”. Anthem Press, 2002 
10. 
2011 
11. 
Continuing Enigma.” Cambridge Journal of Economics 25(6), 2003 
12. 
World?”. NBER, 1995 
13. 
World Trade”.Review of World Economic, 2006 
14. 
Extensive Margin of World”. CESifo working paper, № 1898, 2007 
15. 
Explanation”. Econometrica, 2011 
16. 

17. 
Princeton University Press, 1996. 
18. 
Specification”. Review of International Economics, 2009 

	  

Anderson  J.E..,  van  Wincoop  E.  “Gravity  with  Gravitas:  A  Solution  to  the  Border 

Anderson J.E.., van Wincoop E. “Trade Cost”. NBER Working Paper, 2004 
Baier  S.  L,  Bergstand  J.  H.  “Endogenous  Free  Trade  Agreements  and  the  Gravity 

Chang  H.-J.,  “Kicking  Away  the  Ladder  –  Development  Strategy  in  Historical 

Chang P.-L., Lee M.Y.. The WTO Trade Effect, Journal of International Economic, 

Deraniyagala,  S.,  and  B.  Fine.“New  Trade  Theory  versus  Old  Trade  Policy:  A 

Deardoff  A.  “Determinants  of  Bilateral  Trade:  Does  Gravity  Work  in  Neoclassical 

Felbermayr  G,  Kohler  W.  K.  “Exploring  the  Intensive  and  Extensive  Margins  of 

Felbermayr  G,  Kohler  W.  K.  “Does  WTO  Membership  Make  a  Difference  at  the 

Fieler  A.C.  “Nonhomotheticity  and  bilateral  trade:  Evidence  and  a  Quantitative 

Helpman E.,Rubinstein Y. “Trading Partners and Trading Volumes. Draft 
Irwin,  Douglas  A.  “  Against  the  Tide:  An  Intellectual  History  of  Free  Trade”. 

Liu  X.,  “GATT/WTO  Promotes  Trade  Strongly:  Sample  Selection  and  Model 

40	  

Rose A. K. “Which International Institutions Promote International Trade?”. Review 

Rose A. K.  “Does the WTO Make Trade More Stable?”. Open Economies Review, 

Rose  A  K.,  The  Effect  of  Membership  in  GATT/WTO  on  Trade:  Where  Do  We 

Rukavishnikova  E.,  ICEF  Course  Work:  “International  Trade,  the  WTO  and  the 

Rose Andrew K. “Do We Really Know that the WTO Increases Trade?”. American 

19.  Mayer T., Zignago S. “Notes on CEPII’s Distance Measures, 2006 
20.  Michalopoulos C. “Developing countries in the WTO”. Palgrave, 2001 
21.  Mikic M., “Commonly Used Trade Indicators: A Note”. ARTNeT Capacity Building 
Workshop on Trade, 2005 
22.  Mukhtar  T.,  Rasheed  S.  “Testing  Long  Run  Relationship  Between  Exports  and 
Imports: Evidence from Pakistan”. Journal of Economic Cooperation and Development, 2010, 
p. 41-58 
23. 
Economic Review, 2004 
24. 
of International Economics,2005 
25. 
2005 
26. 
Stand?. Unpublished Draft 
27. 
Impact on Russia”, 2012,p. 25-29 
28. 
2006 
29. 
Journal of International Economics, 2007 
30. 
Policy, 1962 
31. 
32.  Woolridge J. “Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. The MIT Press, 
2002 
33. 
Services”. Maastricht Working Papers, the Faculty of Law, 2009 
34. 

Subramanian  A.,  Wei  S.-J.,  “The  WTO  Promotes  Trade,  Strongly  But  Unevenly”. 

Zettel  M.  “The  GATS,  Privatization  and  Water  Services  An  Overview  of  Legal 

Silva J.,  Tenreyro S. “The Log of Gravity”. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 

Tinbergen, J. Shaping the World Economy. Suggestions for an International Economic 

Volkov, Solodkov. “International trade”. Higher education, 2008 

The International Statistical Institute (isi.web.org) 
Faculty.hass.berkely.edu/arose/ 
guardian.co.uk 
un.org 
wto.org 
wikipedia.org 
un.org 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 

	  

41	  

 
Databases: 
1.  CEPII 
2.  International Monetary Fund 
3.  UN Comtrade 
4.  World Bank 

	  

 

 

	  

42	  

Results 
 
Gravity	  model	  
 
Table 1.1 The log-linear gravity model with robust standard errors 

	  

                             Robust
     limport        Coef.   Std. Err.      t    P>|t|     [95% Conf. Interval]
                                                                              
   ldistance    -.4713831   .0154455   -30.52   0.000    -.5016561     -.44111
      border     1.108496   .0636881    17.41   0.000     .9836673    1.233324
      comcol    -1.351204   .0453767   -29.78   0.000    -1.440142   -1.262266
   curcolony     .2637784   .1742278     1.51   0.130    -.0777073     .605264
     comlang     -.054159   .0290109    -1.87   0.062    -.1110202    .0027022
      colony      2.54271   .0570543    44.57   0.000     2.430884    2.654537
 comcurrency    -.1295805   .0959443    -1.35   0.177    -.3176309    .0584698
developed_~O     1.243817   .0331558    37.51   0.000     1.178832    1.308803
developing~O    -1.057688    .026544   -39.85   0.000    -1.109714   -1.005662
         fta     2.098706     .08341    25.16   0.000     1.935223    2.262189
   Deved_GSP      .893698   .0351306    25.44   0.000     .8248422    .9625538
       _cons     14.32131   .1288679   111.13   0.000     14.06873     14.5739
                                                                              

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

	  	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

 
 

	  

Table 1.2 Test for multicollinearity 

    Variable         VIF       1/VIF  
                                    
   ldistance        1.38    0.725827
developing~O        1.34    0.747922
      comcol        1.30    0.767057
      border        1.25    0.800027
     comlang        1.24    0.807123
developed_~O        1.23    0.810666
   Deved_GSP        1.20    0.834701
      colony        1.16    0.860006
 comcurrency        1.16    0.864455
         fta        1.13    0.884033
   curcolony        1.12    0.894672
                                    
    Mean VIF        1.23

	  

43	  

 
Table 1.3 (a) Correlation matrix for log(distance), border and common language 

               ldista~e   border  comlang
                                         
   ldistance     1.0000
      border    -0.4211   1.0000
     comlang    -0.1335   0.1195   1.0000

 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

	  	  
	  	  	  
	  

Table 1.3(b) Correlation matrix of common colonizer after 1945, current colonial 
relationship and ever in colonial relationship 

               curcol~y   comcol   colony
                                         
   curcolony     1.0000
      comcol    -0.0143   1.0000
      colony     0.2973  -0.0482   1.0000

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1.4 Joint test for cultural significance 

 ( 1)  - curcolony + comlang = 0
 ( 2)  comlang - colony = 0
 ( 3)  - comcol + comlang = 0
 ( 4)  comlang = 0

       F(  4, 76082) =  908.61
            Prob > F =    0.0000

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

	  

44	  

	  
	  

Table 1.5 Results of the gravity regression 
 

(1) Initial regression, without effects 
(2) Regression with fixed effects 
(3) Regression with random effects 

                                                            
                      (1)             (2)             (3)   
                  limport         limport         limport   
                                                            
ldistance          -0.471***                       -0.645***
                 (-30.52)                        (-20.23)   

comlang           -0.0542                         -0.0812   
                  (-1.87)                         (-1.26)   

border              1.108***                        1.404***
                  (17.41)                          (8.84)   

comcol             -1.351***                       -1.698***
                 (-29.78)                        (-19.94)   

curcolony           0.264          0.0868           0.153   
                   (1.51)          (0.56)          (1.00)   

colony              2.543***                        3.398***
                  (44.57)                         (17.90)   

comcurrency        -0.130           0.451***        0.304***
                  (-1.35)          (4.67)          (3.38)   

developed_~O        1.244***        0.914***        1.142***
                  (37.51)         (18.37)         (29.42)   

developing~O       -1.058***        0.298***       0.0649** 
                 (-39.85)         (13.04)          (3.05)   

fta                 2.099***        2.184***        2.298***
                  (25.16)         (36.57)         (41.59)   

Deved_GSP           0.894***        1.572***        1.761***
                  (25.44)         (30.10)         (42.57)   

o.ldistance                             0                   
                                      (.)                   

o.comlang                               0                   
                                      (.)                   

o.border                                0                   
                                      (.)                   

o.comcol                                0                   
                                      (.)                   

o.colony                                0                   
                                      (.)                   

_cons               14.32***        9.961***        14.27***
                 (111.13)        (560.06)         (53.81)   
                                                            
N                   76094           76094           76094   
                                                            
t statistics in parentheses
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

36	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

36	  	  * the coefficient is significant at 5% level 
*** coefficient is significant 0.1% level	  
	  

** coefficient is significant at 1% level 

45	  

	  

Table 1.6 Hausman test 

                      Coefficients     
                    (b)          (B)            (b-B)     sqrt(diag(V_b-V_B))
                   fixed        random       Difference          S.E.
                                                                              
   curcolony      .0867768     .1532414       -.0664646        .0227608
 comcurrency       .451338       .30432         .147018        .0355829
developed_~O      .9138043     1.141972       -.2281681         .031103
developing~O      .2984583     .0649143         .233544        .0083737
         fta      2.183619     2.297876       -.1142566        .0226316
   Deved_GSP      1.571932     1.760747       -.1888142        .0318933
                                                                              
                           b = consistent under Ho and Ha; obtained from xtreg
            B = inconsistent under Ha, efficient under Ho; obtained from xtreg

    Test:  Ho:  difference in coefficients not systematic

                  chi2(6) = (b-B)'[(V_b-V_B)^(-1)](b-B)
                          =      883.64
                Prob>chi2 =      0.0000

	  	  	  	  	  	  
 	  	  	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

 
 
 

	  

Table 1.7 Variables and their mean, variance, min, max  

   stats     limport  ldista~e   comlang    border    comcol  curcol~y    colony  comcur~y  de~d_WTO
                                                                                                    
    mean    10.46702  8.177309  .2214829  .0300857  .0986763  .0018754  .0208086   .014165  .1418662
variance    10.58845  .6421866    .17243  .0291808  .0889402  .0018719  .0203758  .0139645  .1217414
     min   -5.283875  3.782556         0         0         0         0         0         0         0
     max    21.00921  9.421514         1         1         1         1         1         1         1
                                                                                                    

   stats    de~g_WTO       fta  Deved_~P
                                        
    mean    .3692516  .0191195  .1068614
variance    .2329072  .0187541   .095443
     min           0         0         0
     max           1         1         1
                                        

	  

46	  

	  	  

Table 1.8 Hausman-Taylor Estimation 

Hausman-Taylor estimation                       Number of obs      =     76094
Group variable: cpdum                           Number of groups   =     16941

                                                Obs per group: min =         1
                                                               avg =       4.5
                                                               max =        11

Random effects u_i ~ i.i.d.                     Wald chi2(11)      =         .
                                                Prob > chi2        =         .

                                                                              
     limport        Coef.   Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
                                                                              
TVexogenous   
   curcolony     .0473229    .148133     0.32   0.749    -.2430124    .3376582
 comcurrency      .511645    .089821     5.70   0.000     .3355991    .6876908
developed_~O     1.160852   .0416104    27.90   0.000     1.079297    1.242406
developing~O     .1570499   .0212819     7.38   0.000     .1153381    .1987617
   Deved_GSP     1.773603   .0439667    40.34   0.000      1.68743    1.859776
TVendogenous  
         fta     2.342187   .0562649    41.63   0.000      2.23191    2.452465
TIexogenous   
   ldistance     1.118124   .0045547   245.49   0.000     1.109197    1.127051
     comlang     .2220227   .0862439     2.57   0.010     .0529877    .3910578
      border      4.49327   .1943992    23.11   0.000     4.112254    4.874285
      comcol    -1.117194   .1123814    -9.94   0.000    -1.337458   -.8969308
      colony      3.12487   .2493816    12.53   0.000     2.636091    3.613649
                                                                              
     sigma_u    3.8087056
     sigma_e     1.429064
         rho    .87659132   (fraction of variance due to u_i)
                                                                              
Note:  TV refers to time varying; TI refers to time invariant.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

	  

47	  

Cross-­‐section	  weights	  model	  

Table 2.1  The 1st model estimation 

 

Model: Panel EGLS (Cross-section weights) 
Dependent Variable: Export volume index (EXP_VOLUME_IND) 

Independent 

variable 

Name 

Developed country  DUMMY_DEVELOPED 
The WTO member 
Urban population 

DUMMY_WTO 

URB_POPUL_GROWTH 

Coefficien

4863.953

t 

** 

-2.411*** 
-4.894*** 

St.Error 

1470.875 
0.737564 
0.644988 

growth 

Years of the WTO 

membership 

Imports volume 

index 

2.307*** 

YEARS_WTO 

!!=0,625;!"#$!"=0,54 =0,76,  *** significant coef, 

IMP_VOLUME_IND 

0.199750 

0.405*** 

0.026414 

Table 2.2 The 2nd  model estimation  
 

Model: Panel EGLS (Cross-section weights) 
Dependent variable Import Volume Index (IMP_VOLUME_IND) 

	  

	  	  	  

	  	  	  	  	  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

	  

t-stat 

3.306843 
-3.268720 
-7.587744 

11.55068 

15.32320 

Independent 
variable 
Developed 
country 
The WTO 
member 
Urban 

population 

growth 

Years of the 

WTO 

membership 
Export volume 

index 

Name 

Coefficient 

St.Error 

 

t-stat 

DUMMY_DEVELOPED 

-21717.27*** 

1493.925  

-14.53705 

DUMMY_WTO 

10.896*** 

0.748791 

14.55138 

URB_POPUL_GROWTH 

10.415*** 

0.892153 

11.67387 

YEARS_WTO 

2.236*** 

0.200742 

!!=0,752;!"#$!"=3,11 =0,211, , *** significant coef;  

EXP_VOLUME_IND 

0.550*** 

0.024011 

11.13913 

22.90870 

48	  

Table 2.3 3rd model estimation 

Model: Panel EGLS (Cross-section weights) 

Dependent variable: Exports growth 

Name 

Coefficient 

St.Error 

t-stat 

DUMMY_DEVELOPED 

977.51* 

DUMMY_WTO 

-0.485* 

509.5048 

0.255448 

URB_POPUL_GROWTH 

-0.049** 

0.019202 

1.918559 

-1.899531 

-2.533998 

YEARS_WTO 

membership 
Export volume 

!!=0,038;!"#$!"=14,11 =0,0008, *** significant coef., ** sign coef. at 5%, *not sign. 

IMP_VOLUME_IND 

0.009379 

2.001636 

0.019** 

index 

-0.150* 

0.077897 

-1.928367 

Table 2.4 4th model estimation 

Model: Panel EGLS (Cross-section weights) 

Dependent variable:  Imports growth 
Name 

Coefficient 

St.Error 

t-stat 

DUMMY_DEVELOPED 

-1802.925*** 

458.452 

-3.932636 

DUMMY_WTO 

0.904866*** 

URB_POPUL_GROWTH 

0.902136*** 

0.229 

0.161 

YEARS_WTO 

!!=0,538;!"#$!"=5,36 =0,068, *** significant coef., * not sign. 

EXP_VOLUME_IND 

0.656*** 

0.033 

-0.059* 

0.031 

Independent 

variable 
Developed 
country 
The WTO 
member 

growth 

Years of the 

WTO 

Urban population 

Independent 

variable 
Developed 
country 
The WTO 
member 

Urban population 

growth 

Years of the 

WTO 

membership 
Export volume 

index 

	  

	  	  	  	  
	  

	  	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

3.937837 

5.614344 

-1.850936 

19.76980 

49	  

Table 2.5 5th model estimation 

Model: Panel EGLS (Cross-section weights) 

Dependent variable:  Log (Exports) 
Name 

Coefficient 

DUMMY_WTO 
URB_POPUL 

0.007471*** 
-0.001444* 

St.Error 

2.22E-05 
0.000775 

t-stat 

336.7910 
-1.861826 

Independent 

variable 
The WTO 
member 

Urban population  

Years of the 

WTO 

membership 
Log (GDP per 

capita) 

YEARS_WTO 

0.035974*** 

0.001888 

!!=0,96;!"#$!"=187,2654 =0,000 *** significant coef., * not sign. 

LOG(GDP_ PER_ 

0.997441*** 

CAPITA) 

0.008029 

19.05131 

124.2292 

	  

	  	  
	  	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

	  

	  
Table 2.6 6th model estimation 

Model: Panel EGLS (Cross-section weights) 

Dependent variable:  Log (Imports) 
Name 

Coefficient 

DUMMY_WTO 
URB_POPUL 

0.007895*** 
-0.001850*** 

St.Error 

2.09E-05 
0.000709 

t-stat 

378.5537 
-2.609446 

Independent 

variable 
The WTO 
member 

Urban population  

Years of the 

WTO 

membership 
Log (GDP per 

capita) 

YEARS_WTO 

0.036901*** 

0.001950 

!!=0,96;!"#$!"=167,2654 =0,000 *** significant coef., * not sign. 

LOG(GDP_ PER_ 

0.908286*** 

CAPITA) 

0.007530 

18.92643 

120.6233 

50	  

Table 2.7 7th model estimation 

Model: Panel EGLS (Cross-section weights) 

Dependent variable:  Log (Exports) 
Name 

Coefficient 

St.Error 

t-stat 

DUMMY_DEVELOPED 

534.6026*** 

31.91488 

16.75089 

DUMMY_WTO 
URB_POPUL 

Urban population  

Log( GDP of 
neigbours) 

!!=0,87;!"#$!"=0,5472 =0,76 *** significant coef., * not sign. 

LOG(GDP_NEIGH) 

-0.258402*** 
0.022277*** 
0.536445*** 

0.015925 
0.002225 
0.023712 

-16.22663 
10.01151 
22.62343 

 
Table 2.8 8th model estimation 

Model: Panel EGLS (Cross-section weights) 

Dependent variable:  Log (Imports) 
Name 

Coefficient 

St.Error 

t-stat 

DUMMY_DEVELOPED 

481.1683*** 

31.46877 

15.29034 

DUMMY_WTO 
URB_POPUL 

Urban population  

Log( GDP of 
neigbours) 

!!=0,7;!"#$!"=0,9949 =0,61 *** significant coef., * not sign. 

LOG(GDP_NEIGH) 

-0.231497*** 
0.020394*** 
0.525387*** 

0.015709 
0.002199 
0.023404 

Independent 

variable 
Developed 
country 
The WTO 
member 

Independent 

variable 
Developed 
country 
The WTO 
member 

	  

	  	  
	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

	  

-14.73680 
9.272442 
22.44823 

51	  

Appendices 
Appendix	  1:	  	  	  

 

Residuals. Model 1 

 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

50

40

30

20

10

0

Series: Standardized Residuals
Sample 1997 2011
Observations 508

Mean      
Median  
Maximum 
Minimum 
Std. Dev.  
Skewness  
Kurtosis  

 4.31e-05
-0.000796
 0.144549
-0.138220
 0.051867
-0.044053
 2.865500

Jarque-Bera  0.547223
Probability
 0.760627

0.15

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

	  

Residuals. Model 2 

Series: Standardized Residuals
Sample 1996 2011
Observations 449

Mean      
Median  
Maximum 
Minimum 
Std. Dev.  
Skewness  
Kurtosis  

 0.438231
-2.751696
 84.36167
-83.88595
 28.45219
 0.203681
 2.984699

Jarque-Bera  3.108902
Probability
 0.211305

-80

-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

60

80

Residuals. Model 3 

Series: Standardized Residuals
Sample 1996 2011
Observations 348

Mean      
Median  
Maximum 
Minimum 
Std. Dev.  
Skewness  
Kurtosis  

 0.368094
-0.190585
 15.11505
-9.288648
 5.386012
 0.429685
 2.515101

Jarque-Bera  14.11785
Probability
 0.000860

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Residuals. Model 4 

Series: Standardized Residuals
Sample 1996 2011
Observations 388

Mean      
Median  
Maximum 
Minimum 
Std. Dev.  
Skewness  
Kurtosis  

 0.149567
-0.231505
 11.46009
-10.10485
 4.380380
 0.199254
 2.584006

Jarque-Bera  5.365060
Probability
 0.068390

52	  

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Residuals. Models 4, 5, 6, 7 (by the order) 

	  

 

Series: Standardized Residuals
Sample 1996 2011
Observations 1547

Mean      
Median  
Maximum 
Minimum 
Std. Dev.  
Skewness  
Kurtosis  

-0.052666
-0.457539
 3.374430
-4.668724
 1.461268
 0.086251
 1.304282

Jarque-Bera  187.2654
Probability
 0.000000

Series: Standardized Residuals
Sample 1996 2011
Observations 1548

Mean      
Median  
Maximum 
Minimum 
Std. Dev.  
Skewness  
Kurtosis  

-0.013393
-0.169785
 3.689873
-3.532764
 1.415668
 0.073567
 1.395728

Jarque-Bera  167.3992
Probability
 0.000000

Series: Standardized Residuals
Sample 1997 2011
Observations 508

Mean      
Median  
Maximum 
Minimum 
Std. Dev.  
Skewness  
Kurtosis  

 4.31e-05
-0.000796
 0.144549
-0.138220
 0.051867
-0.044053
 2.865500

Jarque-Bera  0.547223
 0.760627
Probability

Series: Standardized Residuals
Sample 1997 2011
Observations 511

Mean      
Median  
Maximum 
Minimum 
Std. Dev.  
Skewness  
Kurtosis  

-0.000947
-0.000387
 0.164683
-0.168109
 0.055480
-0.076963
 2.848222

Jarque-Bera  0.994955
Probability
 0.608063

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

-0.15

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

50

40

30

20

10

0

	  

	  

53	  

	  
Appendix 2:Annual Percentage Change of Trade (Exports, Imports) 

 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

	  

Exports 

-­‐10	  -­‐5	  0	  5	  10	  15	  20	   Annual percentage change of Trade. 

-­‐15	  
-­‐20	  

Exports of 
developed 
countries 

Exports of 
developing 
countries 
and CIS 

Annual % Change of Merchandise Trade; Export. 
Source: WTO Secretariat, Author's Calculations 

-­‐10	  -­‐5	  0	  5	  10	  15	  20	  

-­‐15	  
-­‐20	  

Annual	  percentage	  change	  of	  Trade.	  

Imports	  

Imports of 
developed 
countries 

Imports of 
developing 
countries 
and CIS 

Annual % Change of Merchandise Trade; Export. Source: 
WTO Secretariat, Author's Calculations 

	  

54	  

Appendix 3: Developed and Developing Countries and the Date of the WTO Accession  
 
Albania (2000) 
Angola (1994) 
Antigua and Barbuda (1987) 
Argentina (1967) 
Armenia (2003) 
Australia (1948) 
Austria (1951) 
Bahrain (1993) 
Bangladesh (1972) 
Barbados (1967) 
Belgium (1948) 
Belize (1983) 
Benin (1963) 
Bolivia (1990) 
Botswana (1987) 
Brazil (1948) 
Bulgaria (1996) 
Burkina Faso (1963) 
Burma(Myanmar) (1948) 
Burundi (1965) 
Cameroon (1963) 
Canada (1948) 
Cape Verde (2008) 
Central African Rep. (1963) 
Chad (1963) 
Chile (1949) 
China (2001) 
Colombia (1981) 
Congo, Dem. Rep. of (Zaire) 
(1971) 
Congo, Rep. (1963) 
Costa Rica (1990) 
Cote D'Ivoire (Ivory Coast) (1963) 
Croatia (2000) 
Cyprus (1963) 
Czech Republic (1993) 
Denmark (1950) 
Djibouti (1994) 
Dominica (1993) 
Dominican Rep. (1950) 
Ecuador (1996) 
Egypt (1970) 
El Salvador (1991) 
Estonia (1999) 
Fiji (1993) 
Finland (1950) 
France (1948) 
Gabon (1963) 
Gambia (1965) 
Georgia (2000) 
Germany (1951) 
Ghana (1957) 
Greece (1950) 
Grenada (1994) 
 

Philippines (1979) 
Poland (1967) 
Portugal (1962) 
Qatar (1994) 
Romania (1971) 
Russian Federation (2012) 
Rwanda (1966) 
Samoa (2012) 
Saudi Arabia (2005) 
Senegal (1963) 
Sierra Leone (1961) 
Singapore (1973) 
Slovak Republic (1993) 
Slovenia (1994) 
Solomon Islands (1994) 
South Africa (1948) 
Spain (1963) 
Sri Lanka (1948) 
St. Kitts & Nevis (1994) 
St. Lucia (1993) 
St. Vincent & Gren.(1993) 
Suriname (1978) 
Swaziland (1993) 
Sweden (1950) 
Switzerland (1966) 
Chinese Taipei (2002) 
Tajikistan (2013) 
Tanzania (1961) 
Thailand (1982) 
Togo (1964) 
Tonga (2007) 
Trinidad & Tobago (1962) 
Tunisia (1990) 
Turkey (1951) 
Uganda (1962) 
Ukraine (2008) 
United Arab Emirates (1994) 
United Kingdom (1948) 
United States (1948) 
Uruguay (1953) 
Vanuatu (2012) 
Venezuela (1990) 
Vietnam (2007) 
Zambia (1982) 
Zimbabwe (1948) 
 

Guatemala (1991) 
Guinea (1994) 
Guinea-Bissau (1994) 
Guyana (1966) 
Haiti (1950) 
Honduras (1994) 
Hong Kong (1986) 
Hungary (1973) 
Iceland (1968) 
India (1948) 
Indonesia (1950) 
Ireland (1967) 
Israel (1962) 
Italy (1950) 
Jamaica (1963) 
Japan (1955) 
Jordan (2000) 
Kenya (1964) 
Korea, South (R) (1967) 
Kuwait (1963) 
Kyrgyz Republic (1998) 
Laos (2013) 
Latvia (1999) 
Lesotho (1988) 
Lithuania (2001) 
Luxembourg (1948) 
Macedonia (2003) 
Madagascar (1963) 
Malawi (1964) 
Malaysia (1957) 
Maldives (1983) 
Mali (1993) 
Malta (1964) 
Mauritania (1963) 
Mauritius (1970) 
Mexico (1986) 
Moldova (2001) 
Mongolia (1997) 
Montenegro (2012) 
Morocco (1987) 
Mozambique (1992) 
Namibia (1992) 
Nepal (2004) 
Netherlands (1948) 
New Zealand (1948) 
Nicaragua (1950) 
Niger (1963) 
Nigeria (1960) 
Norway (1948) 
Oman (2000) 
Pakistan (1948) 
Panama (1997) 
Papua N. Guinea (1994) 
Paraguay (1994) 
Peru (1951) 
 

 
 
 
 

	  

55	  

 

Greenland 
Guam 
Hong Kong SAR, 
China 
Isle of Man 
Kuwait 
Liechtenstein 
Macao SAR, China 
Malta 
Monaco 
New Caledonia 
Northern Mariana 
Islands 
Oman 
Puerto Rico 
Qatar 
San Marino 
Saudi Arabia 
Singapore 
Sint Maarten (Dutch 
part) 
St. Kitts and Nevis 
St. Martin (French 
part) 
Trinidad and Tobago 
Turks and Caicos 
Islands 
United Arab Emirates 
Virgin Islands (U.S.) 

Appendix 4 
List of Developed Countries in the World: World Bank Classification (Total #70) 
 
  Australia 
Austria 
Belgium 
Canada 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Estonia 
Finland 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Hungary 
Iceland 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 
Japan 
Korea, Rep. 
Luxembourg 
Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Norway 
Poland 
Portugal 
Slovak Republic 
Slovenia 
Spain 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Andorra 
Aruba 
Bahamas, The 
Bahrain 
Barbados 
Bermuda 
Brunei Darussalam 
Cayman Islands 
Channel Islands 
Croatia 
Curaçao 
Cyprus 
Equatorial Guinea 
Faeroe Islands 
French Polynesia 

 

 

 
 

	  

 

56	  

