	  	  	  	  	  	  

National	  Research	  University	  -­‐	  
Higher	  School	  of	  Economics	  

International College of Economics and Finance 

	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

 

Master Thesis  

Educational program of Higher Professional Education,  

Course 080100.68 Economics 

On topic “Long-term effects of privatization” 

 Second year MSc Student 

Yana Nursubina 
 
 

Scientific Advisor: 

Carsten Sprenger 
PhD in Economics 

 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

 
 

Moscow, 2014 

 

Contents 

1. 

Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 3 

2.  Literature review .............................................................................................................. 6 

3.  Privatization process in Russia ...................................................................................... 12 

4.  Data and summary statistics .......................................................................................... 16 

4.1. Sample description ...................................................................................................... 16 

4.2. Summary statistics ...................................................................................................... 17 

4.2.1. Performance data ................................................................................................. 17 

4.2.2.  Ownership data ................................................................................................ 19 

4.2.3.  Privatization option data .................................................................................. 21 

5.  Estimation methodology ................................................................................................ 23 

5.1. Model specification .................................................................................................... 23 

5.2. Instrumental and control variables .............................................................................. 24 

6.  Empirical results ............................................................................................................ 27 

7.  Conclusion ..................................................................................................................... 33 

References .............................................................................................................................. 35 

 

 

 

 

	  

2	  

1. 

Introduction 

 
Changes in the ownership structure of productive assets have been one of the most 
pivotal  and  controversial  issues  in  the  framework  of  the  transition  processes  of  former 
socialist  to  market  economies.  Since  privatization  has  been  launched  in  the  countries  of 
Central and Eastern Europe, the former Soviet Union and China, interest of economists in 
the  effects  of  privatization  and  transformations  in  ownership  structure  has  only  been 
growing. An overwhelming amount of the empirical studies has found positive effects of 
privatization  on  indicators  of  firm  performance.  However,  the  results  of  privatization 
processes in the transition economies are not uniform across countries, different methods of 
privatization and types of ownership of privatized companies. 

In the beginning of 1990s privatization was broadly considered to be one of the main 
keystones of the transition process. This was mostly based on the successful experience of 
developed  economies,  as  well  as  relatively  big  theoretical  foundation.  Findings  from 
research studies of developed countries, covered by Megginson and Netter (2001), indicate 
that privatization was likely to improve enterprise efficiency and profitability. Importance of 
privatization  in  the  transition  process  was  also  strongly  supported  by  Washington 
Consensus.  (Estrin  et  al.,  2009)  It  argued  for  faster  transfer  of  ownership  rights  through 
privatization  and  promoted  the  belief  that  additionally  to  improved  market  forces  private 
ownership  would  positively  affect  firm  performance  and  the  whole  efficiency  of  the 
economy. (Blanchard et al., 1991) Overall, efficiency improvements were the key argument 
for  privatization  as  transfer  of  ownership  rights  had  to  allocate  resources  in  the  most 
effective way and, therefore, lead to the raise of financial and operating indicators of the 
companies and economic growth. 

However,  results  of  privatization  turned  out  to  be  not  uniform  across  different 
countries,  types  of  new  owners  and  methods  of  privatization.  Surveys  that  focused  on 
privatization effects represent a wide range of empirical results from absence of systematic 
significant effect on performance (Bevan et al., 1999) and mixed results (Megginson and 
Netter, 2001) to strong significant privatization impact. (Djankov and Murrell, 2002) 

Current  paper  is  motivated  by  the  ongoing  debates  among  economists  on  whether 

privatization has any positive effects on firm performance or not.  

investigate 

the 

to 

Research  paper  aims 

long-term  performance  effects  of 
privatization  and  changes  in  ownership  structure  after  it  on  the  sample  of  Russian 
companies  founded  under  the  Soviet  planning  system  and  privatized  in  the  mass 
privatization program. In our analysis, we focus on the questions whether changes in the 

	  

3	  

ownership  structure  after  privatization,  different  privatization  options  and  other  initial 
conditions  had  positive  impact  on  firms’  revenue,  profitability,  labor  productivity  and 
employment. 

Our  proposed  research  project  has  several  novel  features.  Firstly,  none  of  the 
previous  studies  considering  firm  performance  after  privatization  in  Russia  used  detailed 
ownership  data  (by  types  of  ultimate  owners,  measure  of  ownership  concentration)  and 
financial  statement  data  to  construct  performance  indicators.  Secondly,  we  are  going  to 
provide a long-term analysis over 20-years period of time while most of the studies consider 
only up to five-year period after privatization. Additionally, we try to deal with endogeneity 
problem  since  it  is  likely  that  the  companies  were  not  privatized  randomly.  Unlike  other 
studies,  we  use  fixed  effects  technique  together  with  instrumental  variables  in  order  to 
adequately treat selection problem. 

The data used for the study is taken from a panel containing 530 privatized and non-
privatized firms that have been surveyed in 1999–2000 with retrospective information going 
back  to  the  year  1990.  Data  on  ultimate  ownership  is  taken  from  Interfax-Spark  and 
financial data is taken from Ruslana database. 

Contrary to the results of many previous studies we find that the effects of different 
types of owners and ownership concentration on firm performance are limited. Results vary 
across different ownership types but in general show that private owners do not improve 
financial  and  operational  performance  of  the  company.  However,  when  we  analyze 
ownership  in  more  details,  we  determine  significant  effects  of  specific  types  of  owners. 
While domestic private ownership in general has no significant impact on firm performance, 
we find strong positive effect of managers on revenue, profitability and employment growth 
rates. At the same time, domestic individuals have mixed and mostly not significant effect 
on firm performance. Concerning state ownership, we find statistically significant negative 
effect of federal state holding controlling stake in the company. This result is stable for all 
analyzed profitability indicators and labor productivity. The effect remains even for a case 
when  the  federal  state  is  not  controlling  shareholder,  but  still  has  more  shares  than  the 
others.  We  also  find  positive  significant  impact  of  foreign  ownership  and  negative 
significant impact of nomenees on profitability indicators. 

Analysis of different privatization options show no significant effect for options 1, 2 
and 3 but negative significant impact of option 4 – lease-buyouts, which was common in 
1989 before mass privatization and mostly resulted in 100% ownership by employees. 

	  

4	  

Paper is built as follows. Firstly, in Section 2 we examine theoretical and empirical 
literature  on  the  privatization  effects.  In  Section  3  we  provide  information  on  the 
privatization process in Russia and in Section 4 we describe data and basic statistics for our 
research. In Section 5 estimation methodology is presented. Finally, in section 6 we provide 
our results and make conclusions in Section 7. 
 

 

	  

5	  

2. 

Literature review 

In many countries it is widely accepted that private ownership improves corporate 
performance. However, the numerical empirical studies are not entirely conclusive about the 
performance effects.  

Two surveys of Megginson (2005) and Estrin et al. (2009) summarizing results of 
postcommunist  literature  come  to  the  conclusion  that  effects  of  privatization  have  been 
generally positive. However, there is divergence of findings between Central and Eastern 
Europe  (CEE),  the  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States  (CIS)  and  China  (due  to 
differences in policies and institutional development) and between different types of new 
owners. Privatization to foreign owners is found to have strong positive effect virtually in 
all transition economies while the performance effect of privatization to domestic owners is 
on  average  less  impressive  and  varies  across  regions.  The  effect  has  been  smaller,  often 
delayed, but positive in CEE and insignificant or even negative in CIS countries. 

For instance,  Djankov and Murrell (2002) find positive impact of privatization on 
company performance in CEE, but statistically insignificant in the CIS. They explain this by 
the  more  widespread  occurrence  of  insider  ownership  after  privatization  and  a  weaker 
institutional environment leading to less effective governance by outside owners in the CIS 
countries.  The  results  of  Djankov  and  Murrell  are  supported  by  Megginson  (2005),  who 
studied  privatization  impact  in  transition  economies.  He  found  that  “mass”  (or  voucher) 
privatization, implying wide distribution of ownership rights and at nominal prices, often 
led to worse performance. The author explains it by the fact that such privatization scheme 
was frequently associated with insider ownership. Companies with higher level of insiders 
control  did  poorly  compared  to  the  firms  with  a  larger  ownership  share  of  financial 
institutions,  foreign  corporations  or  local  entrepreneurs.  Similar  results  were  obtained  by 
Guriev  and  Megginson  (2006)  who  related  mixed  privatization  effects  in  transition 
economies  to  the  slow  progress  in  microeconomic  and  legal  reform,  especially  in  CIS 
countries. 

 

	  

Hanousek et al. (2007) came to the same conclusion while analyzing the effects of 
different types of owners using a large sample of companies in the Czech Republic after 
mass  privatization.  They  found  sustained  positive  impact  only  for  foreign  ownership. 
Frydman et al. study (1999) using a sample of 506 midsize manufacturing privatized and 
state firms in the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland, also argues that privatization effects 
differ,  depending  on  the  types  of  owners  who  get  control.  Analogously  to  the  previous 
studies  they  suggest  that  privatization  to  outsider  owners  is  positively  significant  while 

6	  

privatization to insiders has no effect on the performance.  

in companies’ performance in a large sample of post-­‐privatization firms from three Central 

On the other hand, Aussenegg and Jelic (2007) did not find any significant changes 

European  countries.  This  was  also  supported  by  the  results  of  Russian  companies. 
According to a large research program by the World Bank in Russia, ownership changes are 
generally  weakly  associated  with  most  indicators  of  performance,  including  sales,  wages 
and  employment  in  the  short  term  period.  (Commander  et  al.,  1996)  Moreover,  common 
results for Russia indicate that while privatization tended to have fairly immediate effect in 
such countries as Hungary, Romania, and Ukraine, in Russia lag of the initial effect was 
much longer, and a modest positive impact appeared only after about seven years. (Brown et 
al., 2006)  

However,  privatization  effect  is  also  very  different  depending  on  the  examined 
performance  measure.  Since  we  are  going  to  investigate  privatization  effects  on  4 
performance  measures:  revenues,  profitability,  labor  productivity  and  employment,  -  we 
will cover previous literature on these indicators in more details. 
 

•  Revenues 

 

	  

Studies, considering the impact of privatization on firm’s revenue, represent a good 
measure of the effect of privatization on the scale of operation of the company. In most of 
the  studies  covering  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries,  researchers  find  strong  and 
positive effect of private ownership on revenues. (Megginson, 2005; Frydman et al., 1998) 
Claessens  and  Djankov  (2002)  investigated  changes  in  the  performance  of  over  6000 
privatized and state-owned manufacturing firms in seven Eastern European countries over 
the initial transition period and found out that privatization was associated with significant 
increases in revenues.  

However, positive effect is mostly typical for studies that cover a longer period after 
privatization. At the same time those studies that only cover short-term period of time find 
less significant impact or even no impact of private ownership. Moreover, positive impact is 
determined for both foreign and domestic private ownership, with foreign ownership having 
greater positive effects. Studies carried out for Commonwealth of Independent States also 
have  controversial  results:  they  find  strong  positive  effect  in  the  early  periods  but  small 
positive or even negative effect in the longer run. (Guriev and Megginson, 2006) 

These results were mostly echoed by Chinese studies. Jia et al. (2005) on the basis of 
53 privatized Chinese companies made conclusions on the negative relation between state 

7	  

ownership and revenues. Another sample of Chinese privatized firms investigated by Sun 
and  Tong  (2003)  also  showed  negative  impact  of  state  ownership  and  positive  impact  of 
legal-person ownership on firms’ performance, which suggested that legal persons behaved 
differently from the state government. 

Considering  studies  of  Russian  companies  (Perevalov  et  al.,  2000;  Commander  et 
al., 1996),  any  strong  relationship  was  found  between  privatization  and  firm’s  ability  to 
generate higher revenues.  

•  Profitability  

 

 

	  

Results of privatization impact on profitability are more controversial than effects on 
revenue.  Most  of  the  studies  are  carried  out  for  CEE  region  and  show  small  positive  or 
insignificant  impact  of  private  (domestic  and  foreign)  ownership  on  profitability  in  short 
term  transformation  period.  Differences  in  effects  are  found  on  more  detailed  levels  of 
ownership structure: positive effects are more typical for industrial (nonfinancial) firms in 
case  of  privatization  to  foreign  owners  and  financial  firms  in  case  of  privatization  to 
domestic organizations. (Hanousek et al., 2007) 

Positive  relationship  between  privatization  and  profitability  was  supported  by 
Megginson  et  al. (1994).  Using  data  of  traded  companies  in  the  Czech  Republic  during 
1993-1995, Hanousek and Kocenda (2003) also made conclusion on a positive impact of 
foreign  majority  ownership  on  such  profitability  measure  as  returns  on  assets  (ROA).  In 
support  to  this,  Miller  (2006)  found  positive  effect  of  concentrated  private  ownership  on 
return  on  assets  to  be  positive  in  Bulgaria.  Claessens  et  al.  (1999)  on  the  sample  of  706 
Czech firms over the period 1992-1997 found that profitability was positively related with 
private ownership concentration, and 10% increase in concentration lead to 3% increase in 
short-term profitability. 

However,  Dewenter  and  Malatesta  (1998)  did  not  find  much  evidence  that 
privatization had persistent positive effects on profitability. They showed that net income-
based  profitability  measures  improved  after  privatization,  but  EBIT-based  profitability 
measures did not. Frydman et al. (1997) and Earle and Estrin (1997) considered profits to be 
extremely  volatile  measure  in  the  short  run  due  to  higher  level  of  costs  just  after  the 
privatization. 

Studies of privatization effects on profitability in China mostly show positive results. 
Thus, Jefferson and Su (2006) estimation of private ownership effect on profit/sales ratio 

8	  

was positive and significant at 10% level. This result was partly supported by Xu and Wang 
(1999)  who  found  positive  correlation  for  Chinese  companies  between  ownership 
concentration and firm performance in case when the company had been privatized by legal 
person shareholders (institutional investors). 

 Study for Russian companies carried out by Perevalov et al. (2000) on the sample of 
189 industrial enterprises in 1992-1996 showed that on average privatization produced little 
improvement  in  profitability.  This  can  be  explained  by  a  relatively  short  period  of 
investigation and the fact that most of the privatized companied had to increase their costs 
during the first years of transition process in order to stay in the market. 
 

•  Labor Productivity 

 

 

In general, findings of the privatization impact on labor productivity show that it is 
primarily positive or insignificant. Foreign ownership mostly has positive or insignificant 
effect, while the effects of insider ownership (employee and management) are determined to 
be  statistically  insignificant.  At  the  same  time  government  retention  of  a  golden  share  is 
concluded to have an insignificant effect. 

Claessens and Djankov (1999) in their study, carried out on the sample of 706 Czech 
firms  over  the  period  1992-1997,  found  out  that  10%  increase  in  private  ownership 
concentration leads to a 2% increase in short-term labor productivity. These findings were 
also  supported  by  Grigorian  (1999)  who  found  positive  impact  of  privatization  for 
Lithuanian firms. Furthermore, econometric results for Romanian industrial enterprises also 
showed positive and significant effects of private ownership on labor productivity. (Earle 
and Telegdy, 2002) 

For Russian companies a positive impact of private ownership on labor productivity 
was found by Earle (1998). OLS regression estimates showed a positive privatization effect 
relative to state, with most of this result due to managerial ownership and non-managerial 
worker  ownership.  Among  outsiders  a  positive  statistically  significant  impact  was  found 
only for individual share ownership. However, this was argued by Perevalov et al. (2000), 
who found no significant relationships between the indicators. 
 

•  Employment 

The effect of privatization on employment is considered to be a good indicator of the 

extent of restructuring brought about through privatization. (Estrin et al., 2009) 

	  

9	  

Most of the studies indicate that there is a tendency for privatized firms, especially 
owned by foreign investors, to increase or not to reduce employment level in comparison 
with state-owned firms, ceteris paribus. (Estrin et al., 2009) 

Comparison  of  privatized  and  non-privatized  companies  in  the  early  1990s,  when 
employment  rates  were  decreasing  in  most  of  the  transition  economies,  showed  that 
privately owned companies, especially foreign owned, were likely to decrease employees in 
a smaller proportion than state-owned firms. (Estrin et al., 2009) This was also echoed by 
Konings and Walsh (1999) and Konings and Xavier (2003) who found positive impact of 
privatization on labor growth relatively for Ukraine and Slovenia. However, these results 
were  different  from  findings  of  La  Porta  and  Lopez-de-Silanes  (1999)  who  determined 
negative  employment  effect  in  the  Mexican  privatized  firms.  Interesting  result  is  a  time 
pattern related to privatization and employment in Polish firms identified by Mickiewicz et 
al.  (2005)  who  found  no  significant  effect  on  employment  in  the  first  three  years  after 
privatization,  a  significant  positive  effect  about  3-6  years  after  privatization,  and  no 
significant effect afterwards. (Estrin et al., 2007) 

Results  for  Russia  are  also  mixed.  Brown  and  Earle  (2002)  found  positive 
relationships between private ownership and growth of employment for a large sample of 
firms.  At  the  same  time  Commander  et  al.  (1996)  showed  that  privatization  effect  on 
employment behavior of Russian companies was relatively weak. This was also supported 
by Earle and Estrin (1997). 

 

Overall,  results  of  different  studies  vary  across  different  indicators  of  firm 
performance,  different  owners  and  different  countries.  Surveys  of  privatization  effects  on 
firm  performance  range  from  those  that  have  strong  positive  impact  to  those  that  are 
cautious on concluding that private ownership improves performance and those that indicate 
no significance at all. This variation in results can be explained by several reasons.  

Firstly, most of the studies rely on short-term investigations observing privatization 
effects immediately or in 2-3 years after privatization. Thus, they cannot capture medium-
term  and  long-term  effects  of  transition  process.  Secondly,  a  big  part  of  studies  covered 
earlier used limited databases or combined data from different accounting systems and, thus, 
had small and often unrepresentative samples of firms. Moreover, taking into consideration 
time of the studies it was likely difficult to identify accurate ownership since privatization 
processes were still ongoing.  

Lastly, many of the studies did not control for endogeneity problem. However, for 

	  

10	  

all privatization methods it is likely that firms were assigned for privatization not randomly. 
This means that those studies that consider allocation of firms for privatization to be random 
can have biased estimates and overstate effect of private ownership on firm performance. 

This paper tries to eliminate all these problems by investigating long-term effects of 

privatization, using proper information bases and controlling for nonrandom selection. 
 

 

	  

11	  

3. 

Privatization process in Russia 

Historically  state-owned  enterprises  (SOEs)  were  established  in  both  the  socialist 
and  capitalist  countries  with  the  ultimate  goal  to  guarantee  economic  development  in  the 
absence  of  well  functioning  markets,  ensure  political  control  of  production,  make  better 
provision  of  public  goods,  be  more  efficient  in  dealing  with  externalities,  and  support 
employment rates and distribute income equally. (Estrin et al., 2007) However, many state-
owned firms turned out not to achieve the targets and showed low economic performance. 
Thus, since 1980s economists started to consider privatization as a means of establishing 
clear  property  rights,  providing  economic  incentives  and  stimulating  superior  economic 
performance of firms and economies at large. (Vickers and Yarrow, 1988) 

There were a lot of various reasons why governments attempted to privatize state-
owned  enterprises:  building  capitalism, 
reducing 
administrative  burden  on  the  state  bureaucracy,  making  private  sector  responsible  for 
needed enterprise investment, increasing government revenues etc. (Nellis, 1991). However, 
the  primary  reason  was  still  to  improve  efficiency  of  state-owned  firms  and  lower  the 
budgetary burden on the state.  

rewarding  political 

loyalists, 

Inefficiency of state-owned enterprises is often explained by different objectives and 
different ways of corporate governance of SOEs and privately owned firms. For instance, 
commonly state-owned enterprises may be required to deviate from profit maximization or 
cost  minimization  in  order  to  satisfy  political  objectives,  by  creating  or  maintaining 
employment in economically depressed regions or by holding prices below average costs for 
redistributive reasons. (see e.g., Estrin and Perotin, 1991) Moreover, even in case of profit 
maximization objectives governments can remain inefficient due to difficulties in placing 
effective constraints on managers’ discretionary behavior. (Estrin et al., 2007) Thus, it was 
widely  considered  that  private  ownership  will  overcome  these  problems  and,  therefore, 
improve firms’ performance. 

In  Russia  improvement  of  firm  performance  was  initially  the  second  significantly 
important privatization target determined by the State Program of Privatization of State and 
Municipal Enterprises in the Russian Federation in 1992. (Perevalov et al., 2000) After July, 
1  in  1994  in  the  framework  of  the  Fundamentals  of  the  State  Privatization  Program  it 
became priority number one.  

 

	  

A  vast  majority  of  productive  assets  in  Russia  was  privatized  in  the  mass 
privatization  program  between  1992  and  1994.  Privatization  was  conducted  at 
unprecedented speed. While private sector share in GDP in 1991 was only 5%, in 1994 it 

12	  

became 50%, and in 1999 it was already more than 70%. (Sprenger, 2011) Although the 
speed of privatization conduct is always one of the principal questions for policy makers 
and there are supportive arguments for both fast and gradual transition process, in Russia it 
was practically impossible to choose the second option. Fast privatization was explained by 
the facts that otherwise price liberalization and other reforms would not provide sufficient 
incentives for state-owned enterprises to restructure and become competitive; state would 
not be able to resist intervening in SOEs (Frydman and Rapaczynski, 1991; Boycko et al., 
1995)  and  managers  would  decapitalize  firms  in  the  absence  of  rapid  clarification  of 
property rights (Blanchard et al., 1991).  

After  all,  the  process  of  privatization  became  the  main  determinant  of  the  current 
ownership  structure  in  Russia.  Due  to  political  reasons  Russian  privatization  program 
favored  firms’  insiders.  Mass  privatization  program  was  targeted  to  decrease  political 
influence on firms decision making in a very tight time. (Boycko et al., 1995) In order to do 
this government needed support of enterprise managers. 

The process began in 1989-1991 during the perestroika, when control of the branch 
ministries  over  the  enterprises  ceased  and  gave  rise  to  incidents  of  spontaneous 
privatization. (Sprenger, 2013) In 1989 employees got an opportunity to lease the assets of 
state-owned firms with the right of a further buyout. Such privatization usually resulted in 
100%  ownership  share  of  insiders  (employees).  However,  with  the  start  of  mass 
privatization such method of privatization stopped existing. 

Mass  privatization  program  from  1992  until  June  1994  implied  transferring 
ownership  rights  from  state  to  private  owners  for  virtually  all  small  enterprises  and 
approximately  15  000  out  of  24  000  medium  and  large  companies.  (Sprenger,  2013) 
Peculiarities of privatization process in Russia mostly depend on the political situation in 
the country, which was highly unstable, with changing governments, a tremendous fall in 
real output and high inflation. Price and foreign trade liberalization in January 1992 did not 
bring  macroeconomic  stability  and  efficiency  of  state-owned  enterprises  was  hardly 
improved. In such an environment design of the privatization program for medium and large 
firms,  which  formed  the  major  part  of  the  industrial  sector,  was  mainly  influenced  by  a 
strong preference for rapid privatization by the reform government and by the interests of 
enterprise insiders and the industrial lobby. (Sprenger, 2013) 

Privatization process can be considered in three stages: the decision to privatize, the 
choice of a privatization option, and tenders, auctions and first secondary sales. (Sprenger, 
2011) 

	  

13	  

On  the  initial  stage  it  was  determined  whether  a  particular  firm  was  mandated  or 
prohibited to be privatized by law or whether the decision about privatization could be made 
by  privatization  agency  or  employees.  For  companies  in  particular  sectors,  especially  in 
natural  resources,  military  complex  and  public  utilities,  decision  about  privatization  was 
mainly  postponed  or  needed  special  approval  of  the  government.  Privatization  plan  of  a 
certain company had to include proportion of shares that could be offered to various groups 
of  potential  investors.  This  plan  had  to  be  approved  by  the  State  Property  Committee 
(Goskomimushchestvo) or its regional offices. After that companies were transformed into 
open  joint-stock  firms,  yet  under  the  control  of  the  state.  Charter  capital  of  the  firm  was 
based on the book value of assets other than land, net of outstanding debt. This fact meant 
that the share prices for employees were very low in real terms because of high inflation in 
1992-1995. 

Second stage implied selling shares with one of the three options. Decision on what 
option  to  choose  was  based  on  employee  votes  with  two-thirds  majority  on  one  of  the 
variants. If no decision was made during voting, Option 1 was accepted as default.   

•  Under  Option  1  25%  of  firm  shares  was  transferred  to  insiders  (workers  and 
managers)  as  non-voting  shares  for  free.  Employees  were  then  allowed  to  buy 
additional  10%  as  voting  shares  with  30%  discount  to  the  nominal  price.  5%  of 
shares could be additionally purchased by senior management. 

•  Under Option 2 up to 51% of shares could be purchased by insiders (workers and 

managers) at a price 1.7 times the nominal value. 

•  Under  Option  3  20%  of  shares  was  offered  to  managers  of  the  company  at  the 
nominal  price  in  case  if  they  complete  a  proposed  one-year  restructuring  plan. 
Further 20% of shares could be bought by all employees with 30% discount to the 
nominal price. 
Third stage of the privatization process implied voucher component. It was settled 
that no less than 29% of shares had to be transferred through voucher auction. Vouchers or 
privatization  checks  were  distributed  among  all  population  of  the  country  at  a  low  price. 
However, because of low investment literacy level of population and limited information on 
investment opportunities, vouchers were poorly used by Russian citizens. A big proportion 
of vouchers was used by employees in order to increase their share in the firm. 32% of all 
vouchers was accumulated by check investment funds. 

	  

14	  

Further privatization steps implied loans-for-shares scheme in 1995 and case-by-case 
privatization, regulated by a new privatization law since 1997. (Sprenger, 2011)  However, 
the majority of the companies was privatized by 1994.  

Special  features  of  privatization  process  in  Russia  were  the  main  reason  of 
ownership distribution. Results of privatization in the framework of ownership structure will 
be covered in the next section. 
 
 

	  

15	  

4. 

Data and summary statistics 
4.1. Sample description 

The study is based on the sample of 530 Russian companies, which comes from the 
Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey, a nationwide household survey across 32 regions 
of the Russian Federation. The survey was conducted from spring 1999 till the fall of 2000. 
It  involved  both,  representatives  of  the  top  management  and  the  chief  accountants.  The 
major  part  of  the  quantitative  information  collected  and  used  in  the  framework  of  the 
research, including output, profits, capital, employment data, wages, costs and investment, 
is based on standardized accounting principles of the State Statistical Committee of Russia 
(Goskomstat). This data was completed with retrospective information concerning the firm 
ownership  structure  changes,  reorganizations,  privatization  information,  labor  relations, 
distribution  of  sales  and  financial  indicators.  The  retrospective  data  used  for  the  research 
goes back to the year 1990.  

 

	  

Firms  for  the  survey  were  randomly  chosen  from  the  whole  population  of 
manufacturing firms with a probability proportional to firm employment. The final sample 
of the database includes companies from 32 subjects of the Russian Federation, and matches 
the overall distribution of Russian firms by industry, region and size rather well. We should 
note that the sample is biased towards larger firms since employees are more likely to work 
for a large firm. It is considered to be a particular characteristic of Russian economy. 

Thus,  our  initial  sample  contains  530  manufacturing  firms.  It  contains  both 
privatized  and  state-owned  firms,  as  well  as  a  few  newly  established  firms.  In  order  to 
analyze  privatization  effects  more  precisely  we  have  excluded  33  companies  that  were 
founded after 1986. Thus, this left 497 firms that were established under the Soviet planning 
economy and could potentially have gone through the process of privatization. 

Information in the database was complemented with ownership structure information 
for  the  period  of  ten  years  from  2002  to  2012  in  order  to  investigate  long-run  effects  of 
privatization.  Process  of  collecting  ownership  data  was  rather  comprehensive  since 
information  on  each  company  was  obtained  and  analyzed  separately  from  Interfax-Spark 
quarterly  reports  or  Rosstat/EGRYUL  filings.  Information  was  obtained  for  all  levels  of 
ownership  in  order  to  find  the  share  of  ultimate  beneficiaries.  All  in  all,  data  on  484 
companies was collected. 

As  for  the  performance  measures,  they  include  the  following  indicators:  revenue, 
profitability  indicators  (ROS,  ROA,  ROE),  labor  productivity  and  employment.  A  big 

16	  

number of indicators was reasoned by the fact that none of the indicators taken alone is a 
perfect measure of company performance. All financial indicators were taken or calculated 
on the basis of Financial reports available through Bureau van Dijk Ruslana and the Interfax 
Spark database.  
 

4.2. Summary statistics 
4.2.1. Performance data 

17	  

In  the  framework  of  our  study  we  examine  effect  of  privatization  on  firm 
performance. Djankov and Murrell (2002) emphasize the importance of presenting results of 
studies on privatization effects so that they can be accurately compared with the rest of the 
literature. Therefore, in order to be comparable with previous empirical results, following 
Megginson et al. (1994), D’Souza et al. (2005) or Boubakri et al. (2005), Bai et al. (2009) 
we  examine  the  similar  groups  of  variables,  measuring:  (1)  revenue  as  the  scope  of 
operating activities, (2) profitability indicators, (3) labor productivity, (4) employment. The 
indicators used to compare financial and operating performance are the following: 
1.  For analyzing revenue as the measure of the scope of operating activity we use inflation 
adjusted sales for the period 2003-2012. We carry out estimation in first differences and, 
therefore,  we  define  the  indicator  as  the  annual  rate  of  change  of  revenue  between 
periods t-1 and t. 

2.  Profitability  is  broadly  considered  to  be  the  best  ultimate  measure  of  corporate 

performance. Therefore, in the framework of our study we use several measures for it: 

•  Return on sales (ROS) = Net income divided by sales 
•  Return on assets (ROA) = Net income divided by total assets 
•  Return on equity (ROE) = Net income divided by equity 

We also use first difference approach for these indicators and define indicators as the 
annual rate of change of ROS between periods t-1 and t and the annual change in ROA and 
ROE, measured as the ratio of the change in net income between periods t-1 and t to total 
assets of the firm in period t-1 and the ratio of the change in net income between periods t-1 
and t to equity of the firm in period t-1 relatively. ROS ratio has an advantage since it is 
based  on  two  flow  measures  of  net  income  and  sales  which  are  considered  to  be  less 
sensitive to accounting conventions and inflation compared to many other indicators. Since 
ROA and ROA do not have such an advantage, we correct them by using assets and equity 
of period t-1. 

 

	  

3.  Labor  productivity  is  measured  by  the  ratio  of  operating  income  to  the  number  of 
employees. For our study we use the rate of annual change in this ratio between periods 
t-1 and t. 

4.  Employment is measured as the rate of change in the total number of employees between 

periods t-1 and t. 
 

Our working dataset contains 1 697 – 2 008 observations on an unbalanced panel of 
241 – 355 industrial companies during the period 2003 – 2012. Since we are using the rates 
of annual changes for performance variables we consider 2004-2012 period. As can be seen 
in Table 1, exact number of observations varies across different performance indicators.  

 

Table 1. Summary statistics of the rate of change of performance indicators 2004-

Indicator (annual 
rate of change) 

Revenue 
ROS 
ROA 
ROE 
Labor 
productivity 
Employment 

Mean 
0,08 
-0,19 
-0,23 
-0,28 
-0,13 
0,01 

Standard 
deviation 

0,61 
2,61 
2,29 
1,71 
1,22 
0,33 

2012 
 
Minimum  Maximum  Number of obs. 

-1 
-9,9 
-8,9 
-7,8 
-4,9 
-1 

9,9 
27,1 
13,0 
6,1 
4,0 
6,0 

2 008 
1 878 
1 895 
1 827 
1 697 
1 912 

 

 One of the issues that should be concerned while working with firm-level financial 
data  in  transition  and  emerging  market  economies  is  the  fact  that  it  may  contain  missing 
values  and  outlier  observations.  This  may  bias  the  estimated  coefficients.  (Filer  and 
Hanousek, 2002) In our study we use financial and operating data of the companies after 
2003 when the equal standards of reporting began to be widely used by the majority of the 
companies.  Additionally,  we  have  deleted  from  our  sample  those  observations  that 
contained  inconsistent  values  of  variables,  such  as  negative  values  of  revenues,  and 
observations with extreme values.  

However, as we can see in Table 1, even after excluding extreme values there are 
huge differences in the annual performance rate changes. There is a big set of firms that 
have  either  very  low  minimum  values  or  very  high  maximum  while  the  means  for  all 
indicators are fair enough. Moreover, we can see that means for profitability measures and 
labor productivity are negative. This is connected with the fact that most of the firms had 
very unstable profits during 2004-2012 years and were more likely to have negative rates of 
annual changes in profits.   

18	  

	  

 

4.2.2.  Ownership data 

The explanatory variables of the main interest in the study are indicator variables of 
the  changes  in  the  ownership  structure.  The  primary  hypothesis  we  study  in  the  research 
paper is whether ownership structure after privatization has an impact on performance of the 
firm. 

Dataset used for the study allows to analyze ultimate owners of the firm and identify 
controlling owner type (if there is any) for each case. Ownership data was mostly collected 
from  quarterly  reports  for  the  end  of  each  year  during  the  period  2002-2012  available  in 
Interfax-Spark system.  

Information  from  the  quarterly  reports  was  mainly  taken  from  section  6  for 
ownership information and section 5.2 about management of the company and their stakes 
in the firm. We identified both, CEOs of the company who had share in the firm and top 
management team who were also the owners of the company. By looking at section 1.1 it 
was checked whether the firm had just a CEO or also a top management team. Section 8.1.1 
provided information about the share of preferred (non-voting) shares in the capital of the 
firm. 

If there were no quarterly reports for certain years ownership information was taken 

from Rosstat/EGRYUL filing also available in Interfax-Spark system. 

The process of collecting data on each company was done in several steps. Firstly, 
direct owners of the sample company were determined. These could include owners from 
the following groups: 

• 
Federal government 
• 
Regional government 
•  Municipal government 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 

Domestic non-financial company 
Domestic financial institution (e.g., bank, insurance company, mutual funds) 
CEO (general director) of the sample firm 
Other top manager of the sample firm 
Domestic individual owners 
Nominee 
Offshore firm 
Foreign firm (except offshore firms) or foreign individuals 

19	  

	  

Ownership  shares  were  recorded  both  for  the  overall  equity  capital  and  voting 
(common) capital of each firm and for each year. If on the first level of ownership there 
were  any  domestic  companies  the  process  was  repeated  until  the  ultimate  owners  were 
found. Thus, ultimate owners of the company could represent state (on federal, regional and 
municipal  levels),  private  domestic  ownership  (individual  owners,  managers  of  the  firm, 
funds), foreign ownership, offshore companies and nomenees. For each ultimate owner the 
final total share of the company was computed. 

This division allows us to analyze the effect of ownership on firm performance using 
two sets of ownership measures. Firstly, we evaluate the performance effect with different 
types of the controlling owners: federal, regional and municipal state, domestic individuals, 
managers of the firm, offshore companies, foreign firms and nomenees. We also test if the 
type of the largest owner in the ownership structure affects firm performance. Secondly, we 
assign all owners into 5 groups, aggregating state and domestic owners into two big groups. 
We examine whether controlling share of these owners or the type of the largest owner has 
any effect on company performance.  

As can be concluded from Table 2, domestic individual owners (Russian citizens) 
represent  the  biggest  group  of  ultimate  owners  with  1 552  observation,  followed  by 
managerial ownership (450 observations) and state federal ownership (401 observations). At 
the  same  time  individual  owners  have  the  highest  mean  size  of  the  stake  held  –  70,4%. 
Statistics show that in cases of state ownership government is more likely to stay controlling 
owner. More than a half of federal state owners remaining their share in the firm prefer to 
hold control stake. The same situation is with regional state. Most of the companies prefer 
to held stake of more than 51% shares. For our sample we got that municipal state owners 
for more than half of the cases held 100% stake. The major part of managers holding shares, 
nomenees, offshore companies and foreign investors do not usually held control stake, even 
if they represent the largest shareholders in the ownership structure. We can also mention 
that golden share is held by the state in a small number of cases. However, it is met more 
frequently for companies with major managerial ownership.  

 
 
 
 
 

 

	  

20	  

Table 2. Summary statistics across types of ultimate owners 

 

Type of 
ultimate 
owner 

State  
     Federal 
     Regional 
     Municipal 
Managerial 
Individual 
Nomenee  
Offshore 

Number of 
observations 

Share in total 
sample (%) 

 

401 
160 
95 
450 
1 552 
244 
233 

 

12,2 
4,9 
2,9 
13,7 
47,4 
7,4 
7,1 

Mean size of 
the stake held 

(%) 

Controlling 
ownership  

Largest stake 

held  

 

50,67 
51 
100 
34,96 
70,4 
35,08 
44,57 

 

231 
83 
60 
88 
847 
79 
104 

 

352 
86 
68 
277 
1356 
124 
157 

142 

4,3 

49 

79 

24,3 

Foreign 
Notes: “Controlling  ownership”  represents  the  number  of  observations  of  a  particular  owner  type 
when his share is more than 50%; “Largest stake held” represents the number of observations of a 
particular owner type when he holds the biggest stake (but not necessarily controlling) in the whole 
structure  
 
In  terms  of  dynamics  of  ownership  structure  over  the  analyzed  period,  there  were 
little  changes  in  the  types  of  owners.  Mostly  they  were  observed  in  the  transfer  of  the 
ownership rights from one organization to the other, thus, mainly changing individuals in 
the ultimate ownership structure. 
 
 

 

4.2.3.  Privatization option data 

In the framework of our survey we also test whether different types of privatization 

options have an impact on firm performance. 

 Privatization scheme is measured by 4 different options mentioned earlier. Option 1 
implies free transferring of 25% of shares to workers and managers as non-voting shares; 
selling  10%  of  shares  as  voting  to  employees  with  30%  discount  to  nominal  price. 
Additional 5% could be purchased by senior managers. Option 2 implied selling up to 51% 
of shares at a price 1.7 times the nominal price. Under option 3 managing group was able to 
buy 20% of shares at nominal price in case of proposal a one-year restructuring plan and its 
completion.  Additional  20%  could  be  purchased  by  employees  with  30%  discount  of  the 
nominal  price.  We  consider  option  4  as  lease-buyouts  that  were  available  before  mass 
privatization program. 

21	  

 

	  

 

 
 

 

Table 3. Privatization data distribution across different options 

 

Total 

number of 

firms 

Option 

1 

Option 

2 

Option 

3 

Option 

4 

No data 
on option 

Non-privatized 
companies 
Privatized companies 
Privatized by 1994 
Privatized between 
1995 and 1999 
Privatized between 
2000 and 2012 

Total number of firms 

121 

409 
375 

16 

18 

487 

 

108 
94 

6 

8 

 

 

185 
180 

3 

2 

 

 

64 
61 

3 

0 

 

 

41 
37 

3 

1 

 

 

11 
3 

1 

7 

 

 

Table 3 presents the number of companies from the sample that were privatized at 
different time and their distribution among 4 different options. The table shows that 77% of 
the firms from the sample size in the framework of our study were privatized during the 
mass privatization program and through lease-buyouts before 1994. 7% of the firms were 
privatized after 1995. 24,8% of the firms remained state-owned by the end of 2012 or by the 
date of liquidation. 
 
 

 

	  

22	  

5. 

Estimation methodology 

5.1. Model specification 

 

 

The main objective of the research is to analyze long-term effects of different types 
of  owners  after  mass  privatization  on  firm  financial  performance,  labor  productivity  and 
employment. Following Frydman et al. (1999), Hanousek et al. (2007) and Bai et al. (2009), 
we use fixed effect model together with instrumental variables.  

This methodology is based on two assumptions. Firstly, there can be unobservable 
ownership effects that include those coming from selection of firms for privatization. They 
are likely to be correlated with explanatory variables and error term in the model and not to 
change  over  time.  For  eliminating  bias  from  unobservable  heterogeneity  we  use  fixed 
effects model. It includes individual specific constant that allows to capture time-invariant 
characteristics.  Secondly,  unobservable  ownership  effects  can  vary  over  time.  In  order  to 
deal with it we use instrumental variables that allow to consider selection problem inherent 
in  privatization.  Success  of  using  instrumental  variables  mostly  depends  on  finding 
appropriate indicators that satisfy exogeneity condition. 

In our study instrumental variables include indicators that measure initial conditions 
of the firm from the original survey. According to Sprenger (2011), ownership structure of 
Russian  companies  after  privatization  was  not  random  but  could  be  explained  by  firms’ 
characteristics  in  the  beginning  of  transition  process.  Thus,  we  will  use  characteristics 
identified by Sprenger (2011) as instrumental variables in our survey.  

Following Frydman et al. (1999) and Bai et al. (2009) we will evaluate the impact of 
privatization  on  the  firm  performance  using  standard  panel  data  treatment  evaluation 
procedure and employing firm fixed effect model. We construct the following specification: 

𝑦!"#=𝛼!+𝑃!"#𝛽!+𝑋!"#!!𝛾!+𝜀!"#,  where 

yijt – the outcome variable, indicating the rate of growth of a financial performance measure 
for firm i between (t-1) and t; 

α! – fixed group effects;  
P!"#  –  key  independent  variable:  either  treatment  variable  equal  to  1  if  firm  i  operates  as 
X!"#!!  – vector of performance indicators (growth rates) at period t-1, which is used in order 
23	  
	  

ownership type j firm in period t and 0 otherwise (for other models) or treatment variable 
equal to 1 if firm I was privatized with option j and 0 otherwise (for model 1) 

to control for the differences in the initial levels of performance indicators; 

𝛽! , 𝛾!– coefficients; 

i – index of a firm; 
j – ownership type; 
t – time index. 

As  a  result  of  solving  the  model  we  get  the  estimations  of β!-s  that  measure  the 

performance contrasts between different types of owners and different types of privatization 
options. We make estimations for several models. Firstly, we will see how different kinds of 
ownership affect firm performance. For models 1 and 2 we introduce dummy variables for 
controlling stake of ownership. Thus, if the stake of a particular owner is more than 50% it 
is considered to be controlling. For models 3 and 4 we test whether performance is affected 
by the single largest owners. In this case we just determine which type of owner has the 
biggest  stake  in  the  ownership  structure.  In  model  4  we  consider  whether  different 
privatization options had different effect on firm performance or not. 

Concerning  the  fact  that  fixed  effect  model  does  not  address  all  types  of 
endogeneity, we will also employ instrumental variables strategy in order to deal with time-
varying effects. 
 
 

5.2. Instrumental and control variables 

24	  

In  literature  of  new  generation  concerning  privatization  effect  on  performance 
endogeneity is one of the most burning problems. (Hanousek et al., 2007; Gorodnichenko 
and  Grygorenko,  2008)  It  is  now  widely  accepted  that  companies  were  not  privatized 
randomly. Owners could make their decision to privatize a concrete company based on their 
expectations  about  its  further  performance.  Thus,  ownership  cannot  be  considered  as  an 
exogenous  factor  explaining  performance.  In  our  study  we  use  a  number  of  instrumental 
variables covered in the paper of Sprenger (2011) on the issues of the choice of ownership 
structure  during  mass  privatization.  Following  Sprenger  (2011)  we  consider  indicators  of 
firm  quality,  attractiveness  to  state  versus  private  owners  and  attractiveness  to  outsiders 
versus insiders as possible reasons of nonrandom selection. 

The choice of concrete instrumental variables for each kind of model is based on the 

significance levels of the indicators in the models tested by Sprenger (2011). 

Firstly,  we  consider  the  case  of  ownership  effects  on  firm  performance.  Based  on 
previous results (Sprenger, 2011) we use level of wage arrears in 1992 as an instrument for 
firm  quality,  share  of  firm  sales  to  public  institutions  in  1990  as  the  measure  of 

 

	  

attractiveness  to  state  versus  private  owners,  and  unionization  level  in  1992,  labor 
concentration in 1992, average wages of industrial employees in 1992 and number of social 
benefits in 1994 as indicators of attractiveness to outsiders versus insiders. 

Taking into consideration results of the paper by Sprenger (2011), while studying the 
effect  of  privatization  options  we  include  log  profitability  1992,  being  computed  as  the 
logarithm  of  accounting  profits  before  taxes  in  1992  minus  logarithm  of  the  number  of 
employees  in  1991,  and  the  level  of  wage  arrears  in  1992  as  the  measures  of  quality. 
Similarly  to  the  first  case  we  use  share  of  firm  sales  to  public  institutions  in  1990  for 
controlling attractiveness for state vs private owners, and logarithm of capital labor ratio in 
1992 for attractiveness to outsiders versus insiders. 

Besides instrumental variables, measuring firm quality, its attractiveness to state vs 
private owners and attractiveness to insiders vs outsiders we also control for a number of 
additional firm characteristics that indicate its size, industry affiliation and location. 

Our sample is biased towards larger companies which coincides well peculiarities of 
Russian economy on the whole. On average size of firms in Russia was larger than size of 
companies  in  developed  countries.  However,  larger  firms  suffered  more  severely  from 
transition. (Frydman et al., 1997) Larger firms usually had higher political support before 
and needed less business justification. Thus, it was harder for such firms to respond to fast-
changing market environment. (Perevalov et al., 2000) For this reason we introduced size as 
control variable into our model. We evaluate firm’s size on the basis of employment in 1991 
but use only dummy variable of whether the company was big or medium size. 

We  also  control  for  industry  affiliation.  There  were  serious  structural  changes  in 
Russian industry during the transition process. For instance, shares of monopoly and export-
oriented  industries  such  as  energy  sector  or  ferrous  and  non-ferrous  metallurgy  rose 
dramatically. At the same time there was a sharp decline in production in such sectors as 
machine-building and food industry. Therefore, industry affiliation is likely to be important 
in transition process in Russia. We consider industry affiliation as exogenous as none of the 
firms  examined  changed  its  sector  affiliation  during  the  period  analyzed  and  introduce  9 
industry dummies according to a sector:     

•  energy sector; 
•  ferrous and non-ferrous metallurgy; 
•  chemical industry; 
•  wood and forestry; 
•  construction material industry; 

	  

25	  

•  light industry; 
•  food industry; 
•  machine building; 
•  other industries. 
Additionally,  we  introduce  three  dummy  variables  for  firm’s  region  location: 
Moscow/St.  Petersburg,  Asian  part  of  Russia  and  European  part  of  Russia  (except  for 
Moscow and St. Petersburg). 
 
 

 

	  

26	  

6. 

Empirical results 

Our research shows that privatization does not produce performance improvements 
“on average”. We find that the effects of different types of owners, ownership concentration 
and  privatization  options  on  firm  performance  are  limited.  Results  vary  across  different 
models and ownership types but in general show that most of the types of private owners do 
not improve financial and operational performance of the company. However, we determine 
significant effects of specific types of owners. 

Table presents estimated coefficients for 8 groups of ultimate owners who control 
more than 50% stake in the company and, therefore, are the major decision makers in the 
company.   

Results  of  the  Model  1  (Table  4)  show  statistically  significant  negative  effect  of 
federal state holding controlling stake in the company. This result is stable for all analyzed 
profitability  indicators,  labor  productivity  and  employment.  Regional  state  ownership  for 
most of the cases shows negative, but statistically insignificant effect on profitability, labor 
productivity  and  employment  growth  rates.  Municipal  owners,  on  the  contrary,  have 
positive insignificant impact on all indicators for the exception of revenue growth rate.  

Positive and statistically significant effect is found for managerial ownership effect 
on  profitability  indicators  in  case  when  managers  hold  more  than  50%  of  shares.  This  is 
connected with the fact that managers having a controlling interest are more interested in 
efficiency improvements and raising profitability. However, their effect on revenue growth 
and labor productivity is insignificant.  

Domestic  individuals  have  significant  negative  influence  on  the  indicators  of 
revenue and employment growth rates. However, for the other cases they are not likely to 
affect firm performance.  

Following  previous  studies,  we  also  find  positive  effect  of  foreign  ownership  on 
profitability  and  employment  growth  rates.  Although  the  share  of  foreign  owners  is 
relatively small and they are not likely to invest in Russian companies due to poor political 
and business environment, they cause a more effective allocation of recourses and higher 
profitability rates. This can be connected with the fact that foreigners can use best practices 
from international companies while doing business in Russia. 

Offshore  companies  have  mixed  effect  on  performance  indicators,  showing 

 

	  

significant positive impact only in case of ROE growth rate. 

Results  also  show  stable  significant  negative  effect  for  all  three  profitability 
indicators. For most of the cases, beneficial owners prefer to appoint a nominee in order not 

27	  

to register shares on their names. Thus, it is practically impossible to say who is standing 
behind  these  shares.  Such  not  transparent  structure  creates  more  risks  for  corporate 
governance and, thus, has negative impact on the profitability. 

Practically  for  all  ownership  types  we  find  negative  sign  for  the  effect  on 
employment indicator. Following Commander et al. (1996) and Earle and Estrin (1997) we 
can make conclusion on the weak effect of ownership structure after privatization on firms’ 
changes in employment. During the privatization process and after it there was a general 
negative tendency as reductions in employment were very typical for Russian companies. 
This was caused by output decreases during transition and over-employment rates before 
privatization. 

Table	  4.	  	  Model 1. Effect of the controlling owners (detailed)	  

Revenue 

ROS 

	  
ROA 

ROE 

Labor 
prod. 

Employment 

 
Ownership 
State federal 

State regional 

State municipal 

Individuals 

Managers 

Foreign owners 

-0,2665 
(-1,74) * 
-0,1537 
(-0,2) 
0,1173 
(0,91) 
-0,2718 
(-3,1) *** 

-0,1341 
(-0,13) * 
-2,2778 
(-0,52) 
0,6928 
(0,61) 
1,3447 
(1,54) 
0,4667 
(0,39) ** 
3,4274 
(1,0) 
2,1851 
(1,62) * 
-2,873 

-2,211 
(-1,6) * 
-7,7168 
(-1,3) 
1,8968 
(1,26) 
0,6159 
(0,63) 
0,9085 
(0,36) * 
3,2897 
(0,71) * 
2,0537 
(1,09) 
-1,4011 
(-1,17) * 
-0,0004 
(-0,01) 
981 
0,2773 

-0,0345 
(-0,12) 
0,1670 
(0,13) 
-0,2223 
(-0,73) 
-0,418 
(-2,14)** 
-0,5038 
(-0,68) 
-1,3054 
(-1,44) 
-0,4822 
(-1,15) 
0,065 
(0,26) 
0,0005 
(0,01) 
1025 
0,2638 

-1,778 
(-1,56) * 
-5,925 
(-1,17) 
0,8912 
(0,67) 
1,1463 
(1,36) 
0,7136 
(0,61) * 
0,8954 
(0,22) * 
1,4109 
(0,89) 
-1,9232 
(-1,86) * 
-0,001 
(-0,02) 
980 
N of observations 
R2 
0,2128 
Notes: Estimated coefficients; t statistics in parentheses 
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 
Size, industry and regional controls are included but not reported. Instrument used for quality 
performance is wage arrears 92, for attractiveness for state vs private owners – public sales 90, for 
attractiveness for insiders/outsiders – union 92, labor concentration 92, log average wage 92, 
number of social benefits 94 

-2,1597 
(-2,4) ** 
-5,8226 
(-1,3) 
0,2792 
(0,26) 
0,0885 
(0,14) 
0,3622 
(0,18) 
3,31 
(1,7) * 
0,7681 
(0,8) 
-1,5129 
(-1,75) 
0,0935 
(1,75) * 

996 
0,019 

-0,447 
(-1,44) 
-0,442 
(-1,27) 
-0,2399 
(-1,38) 
-0,0721 
(-0,62) 
-0,019 
(-0,48) 
967 
0,3338 

Offshores 

Nomenees 

Previous 
performance 

(-3,18) *** 

-0,0062 
(-0,11) 
1058 
0,2304 

In table 5 results for Model 2 are presented. This model tests ownership structure 
effects  on  firm  performance  on  a  more  aggregated  level,  not  dividing  state  and  domestic 

 

	  

28	  

owners into groups. Results show that in general state ownership has a significant negative 
effect  on  profitability  indicators  while  its  impact  on  other  variables  is  mixed  and 
insignificant.  In  this  model  domestic  private  ownership  is  insignificant  for  all  the  cases. 
Effect  of  other  ownership  types  is  mixed  and  not  stable  across  difference  performance 
indicators. We find that foreign owners have positive significant impact on growth rate of 
ROS and labor productivity. Offshore firms positively influence ROE rate of growth. Unlike 
Model 1, nomenees show negative significant effect only on an indicator of ROE growth. 

Table 5. Model 2. Effect of the controlling owners (aggregated)	  

 

 

Revenue 

ROS 

ROA 

ROE 

Labor 
prod. 

Employment 

29	  

	  

	  

Ownership 
State 
Domestic 
private 
Foreign owners 

Offshores 

Nomenees 
Previous 
performance 

-0,2323 
(-0,27) * 
-0,522 
(-0,98) 
-1,6225 
(-0,64) 
1,8681 
(1,82) * 
-2,2887 

-0,0527 
(-0,21) 
0,1174 
(0,77) 
-0,2688 
(-0,41) 
-0,1927 
(-0,58) 
0,3295 
(1,55) 
0,0027 
(0,07) 
1025 
0,3884 

-0,0211 
(-0,02) * 
0,6316 
(0,58) 
1,649 
(0,48)* 
0,7321 
(0,49) 
-1,0428 
(-1,1) 
0,017 
(0,44) 
1005 
0,2565 

-0,3248 
(-0,32) * 
0,3587 
(0,52) 
0,8612 
(0,27) 
1,3046 
(1,05) 
-1,0917 
(-1,24) 
0,0249 
(0,61) 
N of observations 
944 
R2 
0,2432 
Notes: Estimated coefficients; t statistics in parentheses 
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 
Size, industry and regional controls are included but not reported. Instrument used for quality 
performance is wage arrears 92, for attractiveness for state vs private owners – public sales 90, for 
attractiveness for insiders/outsiders – union 92, labor concentration 92, log average wage 92 
 

0,1134 
(1,0) 
0,1656 
(2,36) 
-0,1731 
(-0,68) 
-0,1433 
(-0,99) 
0,1674 
(1,61) 
0,0014 
(0,04) 
967 
0,239 

-0,7621 
(-1,01) 
0,5825 
(1,44) 
1,7927 
(1,32)* 
0,3857 
(0,53) 
-1,8045 
(-2,91) 
0,0717 
(1,82) * 

976 
0,0485 

(-3,04) *** 

0,032 
(0,78) 
1004 
0,2224 

Tables  6  show  results  for  a  more  general  case  when  the  owner  is  not  necessarily 
have the controlling stake but still remains to have the biggest stake relatively to the other 
shareholders. Model shows no significant impact of state federal and state regional owners 
while municipal state turns to be positively and significantly effective in case of ROS and 
ROA growth rates and employment indicator. For most of the cases in the sample municipal 
state remains to be an owner of the firm only if it has 100% share of the company. Thus, it 
performs  like  controlling  stakeholder  having  the  possibility  to  make  all  strategic  and 
operational decisions. At the same time, there are a lot of cases when state federal and state 
regional ownership concentration is less than 50%. Although they remain to be the biggest 

owners they do not have an opportunity to have controlling votes in decision making (less 
than  50%)  or  even  to  block  other  decisions  (less  than  25%).  This  fact  can  explain  the 
differences in the results of different kinds of state ownership.  

Concerning private domestic ownership, according to Model 3 there is no significant 
effect  of  individuals  on  any  of  the  indicators.  However,  following  results  of  Model  1, 
managerial ownership shows positive significant effect on revenue and profitability growth 
rates as well as on employment indicator. 

There  are  mixed  results  for  ownership  impact  on  performance  of  foreigners  and 
offshore  companies.  However,  the  effects  are  insignificant  for  the  exception  of  positive 
impact of offshores on ROE. In Model 3 nomenees still have negative sign for profitability 
and labor productivity indicators but the results are significant only for the impact on ROE 
and labor productivity.  

Table 6. Model 3. Effect of the largest owners (detailed) 

Revenue 

ROS 

ROA 

ROE 

Labor 
prod. 

Employment 

0,2094 
(0,71) 
0,6472 
(0,55) 
-0,0512 
(-0,17) 
-0,1714 
(-0,94) 
0,8418 
(2,25) ** 
-0,7909 
(-1,17) 
-0,0743 
(-0,22) 
0,3066 
(0,98) 
-0,0713 
(-1,54) 
1045 

-0,8746 
(-0,75) 
4,0376 
(0,72) 
2,4679 
(1,77) * 
0,274 
(0,33) 
3,0266 
(1,88) * 
2,9706 
(0,95) 
1,6837 
(1,29) 
-1,4084 
(-1,09) 
0,0486 
(0,97) 
966 

-0,1219 
(-0,1) 
-3,2055 
(-0,56) 
2,5643 
(1,91) * 
0,4443 
(0,56) 
0,0175 
(0,01) * 
1,0097 
(0,33) 
1,7608 
(1,32) 
-1,8751 
(-1,5) 
0,0214 
(0,49) 
997 

0,1818 

-0,76624 
(-0,68) 
0,912 
(0,19) 
1,452 
(1,27) 
0,1473 
(0,21) 
1,7048 
(1,16) * 
2,4898 
(0,96) 
1,7205 
(1,66) * 
-2,1043 
(-2,15) ** 
0,0284 
(0,56) 
1027 

-0,6772 
(-0,72) 
-2,6738 
(-1,02) 
0,7058 
(0,78) 
0,3914 
(0,77) 
0,7599 
(0,79) 
1,9355 
(1,32) 
1,1856 
(1,59) 
-1,581 

(-2,04) ** 
0,0747 
(1,46) 
1046 

0,0426 
(0,26) 
0,7716 
(1,24) 
0,3485 
(2,29) ** 

0,003 
(0,03) 
0,7003 

(3,99) *** 
-0,2393 
(-0,76) 
-0,0617 
(-0,35) 
0,0695 
(0,42) 
-0,0742 
(-1,37) 
994 

 

 
Ownership 
State federal 

State regional 

State municipal 

Individuals 

Managers 

Foreign owners 

Offshores 

Nomenees 

Previous 
performance 

	  

	  

0,21 

N of observations 
R2 
0,2405 
Notes: Estimated coefficients; t statistics in parentheses 
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 
Size, industry and regional controls are included but not reported. Instrument used for quality 
performance is wage arrears 92, for attractiveness for state vs private owners – public sales 90, for 
attractiveness for insiders/outsiders – union 92, labor concentration 92, log average wage 92, 
number of social benefits 94 

0,2698 

0,0237 

0,3487 

30	  

Model 4 (table 7) again aggregates all state and domestic private owners into two big 
groups. However, results for these ownership categories are insignificant for all cases for 
the  exception  of  positive  and  significant  effect  of  domestic  private  owners  on  revenue 
growth  rate.  A  big  part  of  the  companies  in  the  sample  is  owned  by  several  individuals 
(including managers of the company) who are likely to be affiliated with each other. In the 
absence  of  one  controlling  shareholder  these  individuals  need  to  come  to  consensus  in 
decision making. One of the most commonly accepted strategic decision in this case is an 
increase of operation activity, i.e sales of the firm. Thus, we can see a positive significant 
impact on revenue growth rate. 

Foreign  owners  and  offshores  have  mixed  insignificant  impact  on  performance 
growth  rates  while  nominees,  following  the  previous  models,  show  negative  significant 
effect on ROA, ROE and labor productivity indicators. 

Table 7. Model 4. Effect of the largest owners (aggregated) 

 

Revenue 

ROS 

ROA 

ROE 

Labor 
prod. 

Employment 

 
Ownership 
State 
Domestic 
private 
Foreign owners 

Offshores 

Nomenees 

Previous 
performance 

N of observations 
R2 

-0,8936 
(-0,78) 
0,7081 
(0,59) 
1,4689 
(0,7) 
-0,8936 
(-0,78) 
-1,1386 
(-1,24) 
0,0359 
(0,87) 
1007 
0,2657 

0,3566 
(1,39) 
0,4535 
(1,73)*** 
-0,1777 
(-0,44) 
-0,0905 
(-0,33) 
0,4337 
(2,17) 
-0,0216 
(-0,56) 
1045 
0,0458 

-0,463 
(-0,41) 
0,2539 
(0,22) 
1,3406 
(0,68) 
1,4357 
(1,33) 
-1,806 
(-2,08)** 
0,0436 
(1,02) 
966 
0,1239 
Notes: Estimated coefficients; t statistics in parentheses 
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 
Size, industry and regional controls are included but not reported. Instrument used for quality 
performance is wage arrears 92, for attractiveness for state vs private owners – public sales 90, for 
attractiveness for insiders/outsiders – union 92, labor concentration 92, log average wage 92 
 

-0,3414 
(-0,42) 
0,2957 
(0,35) 
0,613 
(0,4) 
1,6572 
(1,94) * 
-1,7536 
(-2,54)** 
0,0327 
(0,79) 
1027 
0,216 

-0,0596 
(-0,1) 
0,0619 
(0,09) 
-0,1841 
(-0,19) 
0,5984 
(1,0) 
-1,019 
(-1,76) * 
0,0883 
(2,0) * 
1046 
0,1765 

-0,1108 
(-1,1) 
-0,2193 
(-1,92) 
0,1815 
(1,09) 
0,0339 
(0,3) 
0,0467 
(0,51) 
-0,0052 
(-0,14) 
994 
0,3169 

	  

	  

In  Model  5  (table  8)  we  have  tested  effect  of  different  privatization  options  on 
performance  indicators.  For  most  of  the  cases  privatization  options  1,2  and  3  show  no 
significant  effect.  However,  we  can  consider  option  4  (lease-buyout)  to  be  the  worst. 

31	  

Although it has a strong positive impact on revenue growth, it shows stable negative effect 
on  profitability  and  employment  indicators.  Lease-buyouts  which  started  in  1989  before 
mass privatization program usually resulted in 100% ownership of employees. Thus, in case 
when ownership is dispersed among many employees efficiency is likely to decrease. 

 

Table 7. Model 5. Effect of the privatization options 

 
Privatization option 
Option 1 

Option 2 

Option 3 

Option 4 

Previous 
performance 

Revenue 

ROS 

ROA 

ROE 

0,0346 
(0,31) 
0,0076 
(0,08) 
-0,0842 
(-0,58) 
0,6183 
(2,01) ** 
0,0126 
(0,34) 

0,202 
(0,29) 
0,0956 
(0,2) 
0,4258 
(0,62) 
-2,6436 
(-1,86)** 
-0,022 
(0,57) 

-0,0021 
(-0,01) 
0,3202 
(0,75) 
0,628 
(1,01) 
-1,9724 
(-1,45) * 
0,0284 
(0,72) 

0,5616 
(1,51) 
0,1651 
(0,48) 
0,8252 
(1,77) 
-0,1324 
-(0,12)* 
0,0299 
(0,79) 

Labor 
prod. 

-0,1699 
(-0,57) 
0,2317 
(0,86) 
-0,5579 
(-1,25) * 
-0,8754 
(-1,2) 
0,0809 
(1,87) * 

Employment 

0,0244 
(0,51) 
-0,034 
(-0,82) 
0,0037 
(0,06) 
-0,2015 
(-1,66) * 
-0,0025 
(-0,07) 

N of observations 

1025 

945 

944 

1004 

996 

1077 

0,3112 

0,2982 
Notes: Estimated coefficients; t statistics in parentheses 
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 
Size, industry and regional controls are included but not reported. Instrument used for quality 
performance is log profitability 92, wage arrears 92, for attractiveness for state vs private owners – 
price control 92, for attractiveness for insiders/outsiders – log capital labor ratio 92 

0,2664 

0,2125 

0,062 

0,016 

R2 

 

Overall,  we  can  make  a  conclusion  that  the  ownership  structure  in  Russian 
companies is very complicated and is better to be analyzed on deeper levels. Thus, when we 
analyze state and domestic ownership in more details, we find more stable results. While 
domestic private ownership in general has no significant impact on firm performance, we 
find  strong  positive  effect  of  managers  on  revenue,  profitability  and  employment  growth 
rates. In state ownership federal state has the most significant effect. It negatively influences 
practically all performance indicators. We also find positive significant impact of foreign 
ownership and negative significant impact of nomenees on profitability indicators. 
 

 

	  

32	  

7. 

Conclusion 

The transformation of former communist economies from almost fully state-owned 
to private is one of the key events in recent history. The question whether changes in the 
ownership  structure  improved  relatively  poor  performance  of  the  centrally  planned 
economies is one of the most controversial today. 

Current paper was motivated by the ongoing debates on the privatization effects on 
firm performance. Unlike many previous studies, our research project focused on the long-
term effects in the period 2004-2012, used detailed information on ultimate ownership and 
financial information and treated endogeneity problem.  

Considering  complicated  ownership  structure  of  Russian  companies  we  made  a 
conclusion that it is better to analyze performance effects on a more detailed level. Among 
other  results  we  have  found  that  in  general  state  has  significant  negative  impact  on 
profitability growth rates in cases when it owns more than 50% stake. At the same time, 
federal state turns to have the worst effect. When federal state aggregates controlling stake 
in the company, it negatively influences practically all performance indicators. Regional and 
municipal state ownership have mixed and mostly insignificant results for all indicators for 
the  exception  of  the  case  when  municipal  owners  have  the  biggest  (but  not  necessarily 
controlling) share among others. In this case municipal state shows positive impact on ROS, 
ROA and employment growth rates. 

While  domestic  private  ownership  in  general  has  no  significant  impact  on  firm 
performance,  we  find  strong  positive  effect  of  managers  on  revenue,  profitability  and 
employment  growth  rates.  This  result  is  stable  both,  for  the  cases  when  managers  have 
controlling  stake  and  when  they  just  represent  the  group  with  the  biggest  share. 
Furthermore,  domestic  individuals  turn  to  be  not  very  efficient  owners.  This  group  has 
mixed and mostly not significant effect on firm performance. 

Following  previous  studies,  we  also  find  positive  effect  of  foreign  ownership  on 
profitability and employment growth rates in cases when foreigners have controlling stake. 
Although  the  share  of  foreign  owners  is  relatively  small  in  the  whole  sample  of  the 
companies  and  they  are  not  likely  to  invest  in  Russian  firms  due  to  poor  political  and 
business  environment,  they  provide  a  more  effective  allocation  of  recourses  and  higher 
profitability growth rates. 

	  

	  

For  all  models  offshore  companies  have  mixed  effect  on  performance  indicators, 
showing significant positive impact only in case of ROE growth rate. Considering nominee 
as  a  group  of  ultimate  owners  we  determine  significant  negative  effect  for  profitability 

33	  

indicators and labor productivity. This effect is stable across different models. These cases 
are  difficult  to  analyze  because  of  nontransparent  structure  and  impossibility  to  find 
beneficial owner.  

Analysis of different privatization options show no significant effect for options 1, 2 
and 3 but negative significant impact of option 4 – lease-buyouts, which were common in 
1989 before mass privatization and mostly resulted in 100% ownership by employees. Thus, 
in  these  cases  ownership  is  generally  dispersed  among  many  employees  and,  therefore, 
operations are likely to be inefficient. 

Overall, limited and mixed effects of privatization one more time prove that process 
of transferring ownership rights was very complex in Russia and needs to be investigated in 
details case by case. Further survey can study ownership data more precisely for each firm. 
Much attention should be paid to transferring shares between different single individuals as 
well as to cross-ownership and holding shares on different levels of ownership structure. 

 

 

	  

34	  

 

References 

1.  Aussenegg, W. and Jelic, R. (2007) “The Operating Performance of Newly Privatized 
Firms  in  Central  European  Transition  Economies.”  European  Financial  Management,  13 

(5), pp. 853-­‐879. 
of Comparative Economics, 37 (3), pp. 453-­‐470. 

2.  Bai, C.-E., Lu, J. and Tao, Z. (2009) “How Does Privatization Work in China?” Journal 

3.  Bevan,  A.A.,  Estrin,  S.  and  Schaffer,  M.E.  (1999)  “Determinants  of  Enterprise 
Performance during Transition.” Centre for Economic Reform and Transformation Working 
Paper 99/03. 
4.  Blanchard,  O.,  Dornbusch,  R.,  Krugman,  P.,  Layard,  R.  and  Summers,  L.  (1991) 
“Reform in Eastern Europe.” Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
5.  Boubakri,  N.,  Cosset,  J.-C.  and  Guedhami,  O.  (2005)  “Liberalization,  corporate 
governance  and  the  performance  of  privatized  firms  in  developing  countries.”  Journal  of 
Corporate Finance, 11, pp. 767–90. 
6.  Boycko,  M.,  Shleifer,  A.,  Vishny,  R.W.  (1995)  “Privatizing  Russia.”  MIT  Press, 
Cambridge Mass. 
7.  Brown, J.D. and Earle, J.S. (2002) “Gross Job Flows in Russian Industry Before and 
After  Reforms:  Has  Destruction  Become  More  Creative?”  Journal  of  Comparative 
Economics, 30 (1), pp. 96-133. 
8.  Brown,  J.D.,  Earle,  J.S.  and  Telegdy,  A.  (2006)  “The  Productivity  Effects  of 
Privatization:  Longitudinal  Estimates  from  Hungary,  Romania,  Russia,  and  Ukraine.” 
Journal of Political Economy, 114 (1), pp. 61–99. 
9.  Claessens,  S.  and  Djankov,  S.  (1999b)  “Politicians  and  Firms  in  Seven  Central  and 
Eastern European Countries.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 1954. 
10.  Claessens,  S.  and  Djankov,  S.  (2002)  “Privatization  Benefits  in  Eastern  Europe.” 
Journal of Public Economics, 83 (3), pp. 307–24. 
11.  Commander,  S.,  Fan,  Q.  and  Schaffer,  M.E.  (1996)  “Enterprise  Restructuring  and 
Economic Policy in Russia.” Washington DC, World Bank. 
12.  Dewenter,  K.L.  and  Malatesta,  P.H.  (1998)  “State-Owned  and  Private-Owned  Firms: 
An Empirical Analysis of Profitability, Leverage and Labor Intensity.” Financial Economics 
Network Working Papers, August. 
13.  Djankov, S. (1999b) “Ownership Structure and Enterprise Restructuring in six newly 
independent states.” Comparative Economic Studies, 41 (1), pp. 75-95. 

35	  

	  

14.  Djankov, S. and Hoekman, B.M. (2000) “Foreign Investment and Productivity Growth 
in Czech Enterprises.” World Bank Economic Review, 14 (1), pp. 49–64. 
15.  Djankov,  S.  and  Murrell,  P.  (2002)  “Enterprise  Restructuring  in  Transition:  A 
Quantitative Survey.” Journal of Economic Literature, 40 (3), pp. 739–92. 
16.  D’Souza, J., Megginson, W.L. and Nash, R. (2005) “Effect of institutional and firm-
specific  characteristics  on  post  privatization  performance:  evidence  from  developed 
countries.” Journal of Corporate Finance, 11, pp. 747–66. 
17.  Earle, J.S. (1998) “Post-Privatization Ownership Structure and Productivity in Russian 
Industrial Enterprises.” SITE Working Paper 127. 
18.  Earle,  J.S.  and  Estrin,  S.  (1997)  “Privatization  Versus  Competition:  Changing 
Enterprise Behavior in Russia.” William Davidson Institute Working Paper 70. 
19.  Earle, J.S. and Sabirianova, K.Z. (2002) “How late to pay? Understanding wage arrears 
in Russia.” Journal of Labor Economics, 20, pp. 661–707. 
20.  Earle, J.S. and Telegdy, A. (2002) “Privatization Methods and Productivity Effects in 
Romanian Industrial Enterprises.” Journal of Comparative Economics, 30 (4), pp. 657-82. 
21.  Earle, J.S. and Estrin, S. (2003) “Privatization, Competition, and Budget Constraints: 
Disciplining Enterprises in Russia.” Economics of Planning, 36 (1), pp. 1-22. 
22.  Estrin,  S.  (2002)  “Competition  and  Corporate  Governance  in  Transition.”  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives, 16 (1), pp. 101–24. 
23.  Estrin,  S.  and  Perotin,  V.  (1991)  “Does  Ownership  Always  Matter?”  International 
Journal of Industrial Organization, 9 (1), pp. 55-72. 
24.  Estrin, S., Hanousek, J., Kocenda, E. and Svejnar, J. (2007) “Effects of Privatization 
and  Ownership  in  Transition  Economies.”  University  of  Michigan  International  Policy 
Center Working Paper 30. 
25.  Estrin,  S.,  Hanousek,  J.,  Kocenda,  E.  and  Svejnar,  J.  (2009)  “The  Effects  of 
Privatization and Ownership in Transition Economies.” Journal of Economic Literature, 47 
(3), pp. 699–728 
26.  Filer,  R.K.  and  Hanousek,  J.  (2002).  “Data  watch:  Research  data  from  transition 
economies.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16, pp. 225–40. 
27.  Frydman, R., Gray, C., Hessel, M. and Rapaczynski, A. (1997) “Private Ownership and 
Corporate  Performance:  Some  Lessons  from  Transition  Economies.”  Economic  Research 
Reports,  97  (28),  New  York,  New  York  University,  C.V.  Starr  Center  for  Applied 
Economics. 
28.  Frydman,  R.,  Gray,  C.,  Hessel,  M.  and  Rapaczynski,  A.  (1998)  “When  Does 

36	  

	  

Privatization  Work?  The  Impact  of  Private  Ownership  on  Corporate  Performance  in  the 
Transition  Economies.”  Economic  Research  Reports,  98  (32),  New  York,  New  York 
University, C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics. 
29.  Frydman,  R.,  Gray,  C.,  Hessel,  M.  and  Rapaczynski,  A.  (1999)  “When  Does 
Privatization  Work?  The  Impact  of  Private  Ownership  on  Corporate  Performance  in  the 
Transition Economies.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 (4), pp. 1153–91. 
30.  Gorodnichenko, Y. and Grygorenko, Y. (2008) “Are oligarchs productive? Theory and 
evidence.” Journal of Comparative Economics, 36, pp. 17–42. 
31.  Grigorian,  D.A.  (1999)  “Ownership  and  Performance  of  Lithuanian  Enterprises.” 
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2343. 
32.  Guriev,  S.  and  Megginson,  W.  (2006)  “Privatization:  What  Have  We  Learned?” 
Bourguignon, Francoi and Boris Pleskovic eds. Beyond Transition. Proceedings of the 18th 
ABCDE, World Bank. 
33.  Hanousek,  J.  and  Kocenda,  E.  (2003)  “The  Impact  of  Czech  Mass  Privatization  on 
Corporate Governance.” Journal of Economic Studies, 30 (3–4), pp. 278–93. 
34.  Hanousek,  J.  and  Kocenda,  E.  (2008)  “Potential  of  the  State  to  Control  Privatized 
Firms.” Economic Change and Restructuring, 41 (2), pp. 167–86. 
35.  Hanousek,  J.,  and  Kocenda,  E.  and  Svejnar,  J.  (2007)  “Origin  and  Concentration: 
Corporate Ownership, Control and Performance in Firms after Privatization.” Economics of 
Transition, 15 (1), pp. 1–31. 
36.  Jefferson, G.H. and Su, J. (2006) “Privatization and restructuring in China: Evidence 
from shareholding ownership, 1995–2001.” Journal of Comparative Economics, 34 (1), pp. 
146–166. 
37.  Jia, J., Sun, Q. and Tong, W. (2005) “Privatization via an Overseas Listing: Evidence 
from China's H-Share Firms.” Financial Management, Autumn, pp. 5-30. 
38.  Konings, J. and Walsh P.P. (1999) “Disorganization in the Process of Transition.” The 
Economics of Transition, 7 (1), pp. 29-46. 
39.  Konings,  J.  and  Xavier,  A.  (2003)  “Firm  Performance  and  Selection  in  an  Emerging 
Economy: Micro Evidence from Slovenia.” Royal Economic Society Annual Conference, 
127. 
40.  La Porta, R. and Lopez-de-Silanes, F. (1999) “The Benefits of Privatization: Evidence 
from Mexico.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, pp. 1193-1242. 
41.  Megginson, W.L. (2005), The Financial Economics of Privatisation, Oxford University 
Press.  

37	  

	  

42.  Megginson,  W.L.  and  Netter,  J.M.  (2001)  “From  State  to  Market:  A  Survey  of 
Empirical Studies on Privatization.” Journal of Economic Literature, 39 (2), pp. 321–89. 
43.  Megginson, W. L., Nash, R. C. and van Randenborgh, M. (1994) “The financial and 
operating  performance  of  newly  privatized  firms:  an  international  empirical  analysis.” 
Journal of Finance, 49, pp. 403–52. 
44.  Miller,  J.  (2006)  “Evaluation  of  Mass  Privatization  in  Bulgaria.”  William  Davidson 
Institute Working Paper 814. 
45.  Mickiewicz, T., Gerry, C.J. and Bishop, K. (2005) “Privatization, corporate control and 
employment growth: Evidence from a panel of large Polish firms, 1996–2002”. Economic 
Systems, 29 (1), pp. 98–119. 
46.  Nellis,  J.  (1991)  “Privatization  in  Reforming  Socialist  Economies.”  Privatization  in 
Eastern Europe: Current Implementation Issues, Ljubljana, International Center for Public 
Enterprises in Developing Countries, pp. 15–23. 
47.  Perevalov,  Y.,  Gimadii,  I.  and  Dobrodei,  V.  (2000)  “Does  Privatization  Improve 
Performance of Industrial Enterprises? Empirical Evidence from Russia.” Post-Communist 
Economies, 12 (3), pp. 337–63. 
48.  Simoneti,  M.  and  Gregoric,  A.  (2004)  “Managerial  Ownership  and  Corporate 
Performance  in  Slovenian  Post-privatization  Period.”  European  Journal  of  Comparative 
Economics, 1 (2), pp.217– 41. 
49.  Sprenger, C. (2011) “The choice of ownership structure: Evidence from Russian mass 
privatization.” Journal of Comparative Economics, 39 (2), pp. 260–277  
50.  Sprenger,  C.  (2013)  “Privatization  and  Survival  –  Evidence  from  a  Russian  Firm 
Survey.”  International  College  of  Economics  and  Finance  (ICEF)  and  International 
Laboratory of Financial Economics (LFE), Higher School of Economics Moscow 
51.  Sun,  Q.  and  Tong,  W.H.S.  (2003)  “China  share  issue  privatization:  the  extent  of  its 
success.” Journal of Financial Economics, 70 (2), pp. 183-222. 
52.  Vickers, J. and Yarrow, G. (1988) “Privatization: An Economic Analysis.” Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
53.  Walsh, P.P. and Whelan, C. (2001) “Firm Performance and the Political Economy of 
Corporate  Governance:  Survey  Evidence  for  Bulgaria,  Hungary,  Slovakia  and  Slovenia.” 
Economic Systems, 25 (2), pp. 85-112. 
54.  Xu,  X.  and  Wang,  Y.  (1999)  “Ownership  Structure  and  Corporate  Governance  in 
Chinese Stock Companies.” China Economic Review, 10, pp. 75-98. 

38	  

	  

