Национальный исследовательский университет - 

ВВВыыысссшшшаааяяя   шшшкккооолллааа   эээкккооонннооомммииикккиии   

Международный Институт Экономики и Финансов 

ВЫПУСКНАЯ КВАЛИФИКАЦИОННАЯ РАБОТА 

на тему: 

'The Effect of Acquisition of Stadium Naming Rights on 

Shareholder Wealth: Analysis and Optimal Strategy' 

   
   

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 Студентка: 
 
4 курс, 1 группа 
Мичунович София 
 
  
 
Научный руководитель: 
 
Доктор социологических наук 
Барков Сергей Александрович 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

МОСКВА,  2013 год 

LIST OF CONTENTS 
 
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................ 
 
1. 
THE CONCEPT OF NAMING RIGHTS DEALS........................................... 
            1.1  NAMING RIGHTS DEALS: CORE CHARACTERISTICS................... 
            1.2  EVOLUTION OF NAMING RIGHTS DEALS....................................... 
            1.3  CONCLUSIONS...................................................................................... 
 
2. 
LITERATURE REVIEW................................................................................. 
             2.1  FRAMEWORK OF EVENT STUDY..................................................... 
             2.2  EVENT STUDIES IN VARIOUS FIELDS............................................ 
             2.3  EVENT STUDIES IN SPONSORSHIP.................................................. 
             2.4  CONCLUSIONS..................................................................................... 
 
3. 
              3.1  DATA COLLECTION......................................................................... 
              3.2  ABNORMAL RETURNS CALCULATION....................................... 
              3.3  DETERMINATION OF TEST ON SIGNIFICANCE  

 METHODOLOGY............................................................................................ 

         OF ABNORMAL RETURNS............................................................  
              3.4  WMM TEST FOR SIGNIFICANCE OF ABNORMAL RETURNS.. 
 
              3.5  K-MEANS CLUSTERING ............................................................ 
              3.6  THE QUETELET INDEX............................................................ 
 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
 
7. 
 
8. 

LIST OF REFERENCE..............................................................................   

APPENDIX..................................................................................................  

RESULTS.......................................................... ....................................... 

 

 

 

HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT.......................................................... 

CONCLUSION.......................................................... ............................. 

 
 
 

3 

 

6 
6 
8 
10 

11 
11 
12 
13 
15 

16 
16 
17 

20 
21 
23 
25 

26 

37 

45 

47 

49 

2 

 
INTRODUCTION. 
 
The last two decades can be defined as a sponsorship era. Even though the concept of attributing the 
name to beneficiary's institution in exchange for financial support is known to history from ancient 
times, never has it experienced such magnitude of dealerships as today. Meenaghan (1983) finds 
that commercial sponsorship increased sharply since the 1970s and sport sponsorship made 70 per 
cent of all sponsorship activities. The combination of increase in sport popularity during the 19th 
century  with  the  development  of  mass  media  contributed  to  formation  of  such  special  branch  in 
marketing as sport sponsorship. Such strategy arose as attempt to provide signal of high quality of 
product by being officially associated with the healthy sport activities. In 1980s the explosion of the 
corporate  sponsorships  occurred,  becoming  more  of  a  routine  by  2000,  but,  nevertheless,  still 
showing huge acceleration today. 
 
Stadium naming rights deals are associated with transaction of exclusive right to name a facility in 
exchange for financial support over the specified period of contract. Being an innovation in 1980s,  
acquisition of corporate  naming rights persuaded high effectiveness  as a  marketing strategy with 
respect to increase in brand awareness and sales profitability rather soon. By the end of 20th century, 
such strategy became the widely-applied step towards catching the more mass media spotlight and 
enhancing the market share of the brand. By 2002, more then 70 per cent of venues in the major 
league sports had been named after some corporate sponsors (Howard and Crompton, 2003). Today, 
the  stadium  without  corporate  name  brings  more  surprises  in  the  USA  and  Canada  than  those 
without one. Kishner (2011) states that even though stadium naming rights deals are not the newest 
concept, such vast permutations and applications have never occurred before. Indeed, the length of 
contract  has prolonged, the list of exclusive rights among the parties has enhanced, the prices of 
dealerships continue to shift the highest paid record. McCarthy(2000) believes that naming rights 
deals provide the most cost effective marketing communication nowadays. 
 
However, due to partially intangible nature of such contracts, usual accounting principles are not 
capable of capturing the value effect of the company immediately after the implementation of such 
strategy. Determination of the value of naming rights implies not only the change in profitability it 
causes, but also increase in brand awareness, exposure to mass events, perceptions of public and 
other effects that can impact company's value. Consequently, some researchers suggested using the 

 
 
 

3 

event  study  methodology  to  capture  the  effect  of  implementation  of  such  strategic  policy  on  the 
firm's value. McWilliams et al. (1997, p.626) define event study as a powerful tool that can help 
researcher determine  the financial impact of changes in corporate policy. It is believed that stock 
prices  are  less  prone  to  inside  maneuvers  than  accounting  ratios  or  figures,  and,  under  the 
assumption of efficient markets, the price reaction to unexpected announcement is immediately and 
fairly reflected in stock price movement. On this principle, the event study measures whether the 
market  participants  find  the  announcement  to  be  value-enhancing,  value-depressing  or  of  neutral 
effect for the company. 
 
The naming right deals announcements are reviewed in several works. Johson (2009) investigated 
the  impact  of  51  sponsorship  announcement  on  companies  in  Australia  and  found  no  overall 
significant reaction, concluding that such an announcement does not shake up investors beliefs. But 
why would this still be considered as one of the most effective strategies, if there were no reaction 
in beliefs? Janney et. al. (2013) performed usual event study and found insignificant overall result, 
but provided some insights on observable significance if the sample is divided according to some 
characteristics.  The  first  step  towards  resolving  the  paradox  of  no  significant  result  of  the  most 
effective strategy became the work of Clark et al (2003) and  Marikova et al. (2007) who used the 
same  sample  but  received  drastically  different  result.  Clark  et  al  included  multiple  firm-specific 
factors  and  examined  the  effect  according  to  each,  while  Marikova  simply  observed  the  overall 
effect.  The  categorizations  proved  to  be  important  and  Clark  et  al  (2003)  suggested  that  further 
studies might focus on emphasizing more specific factors as well as stated that capturing the effect 
might  help  explain  the  investors  psychological  changes  and  account  for  them  in  future. 
Nevertheless, their study used very long event window, in comparison to what literature suggests as 
high powered (McKinlay,1997  ), and might be prone to numerous other events that happen within 
the  company  for  that  period.  Moreover,  all  of  the  studies  used  the  assumption  of  normality  of 
abnormal  returns  and  subsequently  implemented  the  parametric  tests,  while  having  rather  small 
sample, around 50 observations. This might lead to problematic hypotesis testing and non-robust 
results. In general, the performed studies might not be completely reliable analysis of stock market 
performance  after  such  announcement  and  left  numerous  drawbacks  to  be  corrected  in  future 
studies.  
 
The validity of this work: 
 

 
 
 

4 

The naming rights deals are considered as one of most effective marketing approach to increase the 
market share and brand awareness. Nevertheless, it has a surprising deficit of works that accurately 
provide the research and make reasonable conclusions. Those works either account on unreasonable 
assumptions, or do not investigate the question deeply enough. This study attempts to provide such 
work and give broader insight in the concept of naming rights deals. 
 
The aim of this work: 
 
The effect of the announcement of new management strategy can have numerous factors impacting 
the direction of reaction. This study will provide analysis of seven factors which are expected to 
have reaction due to physiologically different signal they bring forward. Moreover, the  advice for 
future contracts are set according to the weight company's characteristics tended to impact within 
this  sample. The  advise  provides  the  set  of  characteristics  with  most  promising  value  impact,  as 
well  as  the  set  of  characteristics  which  should  eliminate  the  idea  of  stadium  naming  rights 
acquisition for the company. 
 
The structure of this work: 
 
The work will gradually introduce the concepts needed to determine  each step in theoretical as well 
as  methodological  framework.  The  core  concept  of  naming  rights  will  be  discussed  with  brief 
historical overview. This aims to highlight the  evolution of naming rights dealership and rapidly 
changing patterns of its structure. The event study literature will be included in the way that covers 
completely all the questions and ideas connected to this study. That means, some theoretical basis 
for understanding, key issues investigated by event study methodology and potential problems that 
arose,  literature  focused  more  precisely  on  the  similar  question  and  the  received  answers.  The 
rationale of hypothesis development will be explained in details. The methodology will be provided 
with  explanation  of  the  choice  of  tests  and  consequent  results  will  be  discussed.  In  the  end,  the 
advice for future naming rights deals will be introduced. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

5 

1           THE CONCEPT OF NAMING RIGHTS DEALS 
 
The  following  chapter  is  devoted  to  defining  the  needed  benchmark  for  study  of  naming  rights 
deals. In the first part I will introduce the definition, motives and main characteristics of this kind of 
deals.  In  the  second  part,  a  brief    history  of  naming  rights  deals,  focused  particularly  on  sport 
facilities, will be provided in order to highlight the latest trends and magnitude of such deals. In the 
third part conclusions will be outlined. 
 
1.1        NAMING RIGHTS DEALS: CORE CHARACTERISTICS 
 
'Naming  Rights  can  be  broadly  defined  as  a  privilege  of  associating  a  sponsor's  name  with  a 
building, project or event by including the sponsor's name in the title of item being named' (Ashley 
and Ohara: 'Valuing Naming Rights', 2001,p.2).  
Naming rights deals imply transactions involving purchase of the exclusive right to name the item 
or facility by the corporate brand name over the period of signed contract.  
 
Considering  the  characteristics  of  naming  right  deal  it  can  be  reasonably  referred  to  as  a 
sponsorship. The well accepted definition of sponsorship is 'an investment in causes or events to 
support corporate objectives (for example by enhancing corporate image) or marketing objectives 
(such as increasing brand awareness)' (Gardner  and Shuman, 1988, p.44). Acquisition of naming 
rights can be thus defined as a sponsorship deal with aim to increase the future sales and impact the  
brand recognition by exploiting larger public exposure, media spotlight and increased opportunities 
of sale.  
 
The existing literature shows numerous rationale behind the involvement in sponsorship deals, but 
the  one  being  most  often  cited  is  provided  by  Cornwell  et  al.  (1998),  who  define  the  following 
motives of sponsorship: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 

improving goodwill 
enhancing image 
rising awareness 
increasing profitability 
contributing to community  

6 

hospitals 
schools 
parks 
shopping molls 
sport facilities 
events 
products 
stations 

The resonance of these motives vary with respect to specificity of naming rights deal. The objects 
of interest in such partnerships are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
The change in value such marketing strategy brings is hardly measurable within a specified time, 
especially in monetary terms. The reason behind it is that significant effect is of intangible nature 
and, thus, typical accounting procedures are not  being enough. 'Traditional methods of accounting 
do not accurately capture the value of intangible property, even though accountants do acknowledge 
its  existence'  (Ashley  and  Ohara:  'Valuing  Naming  Rights',  2001,p.3).  Nevertheless,  marketing 
professionals refer to naming rights sponsorship as one of the most effective marketing strategies in 
their  effect.    'When  it  comes  to  deal-making,  stadium  naming-rights  sponsorships  represent  the 
pinnacle of sports marketing, a rare opportunity to elevate a brand’s identity by aligning with the 
nation’s  most  visible  and  treasured  venues,  and  the  teams  they  host'  (P.Brown,  Sports  Business 
Journal, 'Effective, creative activation gives naming rights more impact', July 2011, p. 32). 
 
Even though an equivalent effect on brand awareness can be achieved through marketing strategies 
via-commercials, newspapers and events, none of them implies such exposure to social gatherings 
as in the case of putting the brand name on the stadium. The sport facility naming right purchase 
implies  the  implementation  of  brand's  logo,  as  well  as  change  of  facility's  name  in  all  official 
sources for the period of contract. It also requires news and events associated with the stadium to be 
accompanied exclusively with the new name and logo. Contracts require logos and commercials of 
company to be shown on all the displays within the stadium area for a pre-specified amount of time. 
'Naming rights relationships, arguably, provide the most cost effective marketing communication in 
the  market  place  today'(McCarthy  et  al.  (2000):  'An  examination  of  rationale  and  motives  for 
corporate  purchase  of  stadium  and  arena  naming  rights',  Cyber  Journal  of  Sport  Marketing, 
iss.1327-6816). 
 
 
 

7 

 
Nevertheless, direct and observable changes can occur immediately in form of increased sales. The 
contract often secures company to be the sole provider of goods and services within the stadium. 
The  evidence  shows  that  effect  is  even  higher  if  company  and  stadium  have  complementary 
character and  highlight their similar objectives. Consequently, the profitability in the days of games 
hosted at that stadium can surge due to large sales volumes of products and services as well as huge 
revenue from parking places. As for stadiums, these type of deals are highly beneficial as well. In 
some cases, they occur as a consequence of financial contribution by company for reconstruction or 
improvement of facility purposes. Often, companies go further and contribute to events, teams and 
innovations within stadium. Such dealerships vary from 5 to 30 years, often being prolonged for 
another period. The deals are well predetermined  and give opportunity to break the contract off in 
case one of sides engages in reputation reducing activities, scandal and bankruptcy situations. 
 
 
1.2         EVOLUTION OF NAMING RIGHTS DEALS 
 
The  concept  of  naming  rights  dealership  is  familiar  to  history  for  decades.  There  were  always 
institutions  in  financial  need,  which,  in  response  to  generous  help,  attributed  their  name  to  the 
beneficiaries.  Referring  to  the  history  of  stadiums  sponsorships  exclusively,  the  beginning  links 
back to 1920s. The first naming deal with sport facility was made by William Wrigley, the owner of 
Wrigley Company. Numerous deals, following this start point, were also in the context of personal 
naming  rights  acquisition,  mainly  using  family  name  of  companies'  owner  (for  example,  Busch 
Stadium after the owner of Budweiser). This type of dealership was soon replaced by the corporate 
naming rights deals, when in 1980s The Forum Stadium sold its name to Great Western Savings and 
Loan. This type of dealership continues to accelerate in demand.  By 2002, more then 70 per cent of 
venues  in  the  major  league  sports  had  been  named  after  some  corporate  sponsors  (Howard  and 
Crompton, 2003). The relatively limited supply  of the major stadiums combined with the lasting 
signed  contracts  contributed  to  the  rise  of  similar  partnerships  with  minor,  university  and  even 
college league facilities (BB&T Field, Jones AT&T Stadium,etc). The latest estimates suggest that 
when  the  recently  planned  deals  are  implemented  into  practice,  there  might  be  only  eight  NFL 
stadiums not attached to corporate name (Crabtree, 2013). 
 
The conditions signed within the deals evolved dramatically as well. In the start, contracts did not 

 
 
 

8 

go far beyond acquisition of logo place on the roof of the stadium. Now, the deals provide both 
parties with variety of privileges as well as wide space for corporation. As so, the contracts give 
opportunity to provide  company's goods or services within the stadium, for example, all payments 
and  cash  points  done  by  the  financial  company's  cards  within  the  stadium  area,    beer  and  food 
provided  by  company,  if  it  is  from  brewing  or  food  industry. The  price  of  naming  right  deals  is 
surging with time as well. Finkel (2011) noticed that in 1966 the stadium of NFL team, Oakland 
Raiders, was purchased for $7.2 millions over the period of 6 years and was considered as absolute 
boom for that time. By 1987 another NFL stadium, home of Miami Dolphins, sold naming rights to 
Sun Life Corporation for $37.5 million over 5-years contract. In 2000 the striking amount for such 
deal was $320 million for 32 years by Reliant Energy, while the latest record is $400 million 25-
years contract signed by MetLife in 2010.  
 
There  are  several  non-promising  examples  of  such  deals,  which  were  broken  off  soon  due  to 
bankrupcy or other scandal one party was involved in. The most quoted example in papers is the 
one connected to the Enron Field, which received its name after the huge energy company. The high 
diapason of scandal affected both parties in contract when the energy company went bankrupt. The 
stadium had to re-purchase the naming rights in order to bare the least costs in form of reputation 
burden.   
 
Despite  some  results  reveal  possible  depressing  outcomes,  the  considerably  surging  pattern  of 
involvement in naming rights contracts over the last century still continues. The magnitude of the 
deals increased, the length of contract is prolonged, the maximum price willing to be paid still rises 
and  the  search  in  new  spare  facilities  continues.  The  vast  number  of  companies  also  engage  in 
multiple  corporate  naming  contracts  (AT&T  Park  and  AT&T  Arena,  FedEX  Field  and  FedEx 
Stadium, Scotiabank Saddledome and Scotiabank Place) and numerous contracts are set for infinite 
number of years (Rogers Centre, Coors Field, Jones AT&T Stadium).  
 
Hence, the pattern is rather promising. International Journal of Sports Marketing and Sponsorship 
states    growth  of  number  of  title  sponsorship  deals  is  estimated  as  $750  million  per  year  for  32 
countries, while the USA makes the half of it (IMR Sports Marketing and Sponsorship Intelligence, 
'Sponsorship Today', 2050-4888). 'Naming rights and sponsorship deals are, of course, nothing new, 
but never before have we seen such a proliferation in the number and permutations of such deals as 
there have been in recent years' (Kishner, 2011, p.1).  

 
 
 

9 

1.3          CONCLUSIONS 
  
The rate of naming rights deal occurrence is accelerating with time. If few decades ago no one even 
thought about local facility being named after the corporate brand name, now it becomes surprising 
if  one  is  not.  The  companies  evidently  find  it  as  a  reasonable  investment  and  great  marketing 
strategy,  as  they  expect  numerour  feedbacks  in  terms  of  increased  awareness,  profitability, 
reputation  and  public  exposure. This  field  of  deals  have  changed  significantly  in  terms  of  price, 
lenght and magnitude of contracts. Obviously, this became one of the significant part of sponsorship 
and marketing and lot of hopes is put on such strategy. The history suggests the demand for sport 
facilities is still moving in the upward trend and will continue so in, at least, nearest future. The 
professional marketologists beliefs of acquisition of naming rights as one of the most efficient paths 
towards the success imply this field is worth investigating deeper. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

10 

2.             LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
 
The following chapter will contain four parts. In the first part, I will introduce the framework of 
event study by outlining the basic works and findings. These are considered as a core findings and a 
startpoint of the whole methodology. Further, I will provide discussion of several works which used 
event study for various, not specifically corporate issues. The examples will be from managerial and 
even  surprisingly  different  aspects,  which  suggests  broaden  application  of  the  study.  Next,  the 
literature review will be focused on event studies within the sponsorship of stadiums, defining the 
major outcomes and commentaries. They  all together give insights on what whould be done and 
what drawbacks they did not consider in conclusions. The fourth part will be conclusion of chapter. 
 
 
2.1          FRAMEWORK OF EVENT STUDY  
 
 
Event  study  is  a  technique  used  to  measure  the  reaction  of  the  capital  market  to  the  certain 
announcement. A.McWilliams et al. (1997, p.626) define event study as a powerful tool that can 
help  researchers  assess  the  financial  impact  of  changes  in  corporate  policy.  Unlike  other  factors 
reflecting companies' performance, such as sales, the capital market captures immediate magnitude 
and sign of shareholders' reaction to the announced strategy.  
 
The  beginning  of  the  event  study  methodology  development  is  assigned  to  the  work  of  Dolley 
(1993),  who  assessed  the  reaction  of  stock  to  the  split  announcement  and  received  evidence  of 
beneficial abnormal returns around the news date. After that work, a significant amount of studies 
were performed in the same field and,  consequently, many new approaches and limitations arose. 
Binder (1998) suggests, that event study methodology has become widely applicable and is aimed 
to  answer  one  of  the  following  two  questions:  'is  the  market  efficient?'  or  'if  market  is  efficient, 
what impact do announcements bring to value of the firm?'. In order to restrict event study with 
measuring the reaction to the news arrival and receive reliable and valuable results, the researcher 
must control for the effect of fluctuations caused by market inefficiencies.   
 
 The necessary condition for capturing precisely the reaction to the announcement, the assumption 

 
 
 

11 

of  market  efficiency,  at  least  with  respect  to  the  public  information,  is  set.  Fama  (1991)  defines 
market to be semi-strong form efficient if stock prices fully and fast adjust to all the releases of new 
public information. More precisely, this means that prices include all available information on not 
only past values of the stock under consideration, but past values of other assets as well as all other 
possible  influential  variables  observed  by  public.  This  is  outlined  by  all  studies  as  the  main 
condition towards the successful research results on impact of announcement, and will also be one 
of the initial assumption in this research. 
 
 
2.2          EVENT STUDIES IN VARIOUS FIELDS 
 
 
Literature  has  difficulty  to  count  the  overall  number  of  event  studies  performed  during  last  two 
decades, but certainly outlines the numerous developments of tests on significance of the results as 
well as extensions to more managerial fields of study. The 'classic' work, serving as a baseline of the 
whole further practices, is the paper by Fama, Fisher, Jensen and Roll (1969), who contributed their 
work to determining common stock prices reaction to stock split based on monthly data. The result 
proved significant shock of returns which adjusted to the new public information fastly. The huge 
break through was made by  Brown and Warner (1985), who examined properties of stock returns 
based  on  daily  data.  The  extension  of  this  paper  is  using  daily  data  rather  than  monthly  in 
methodology of event study. This is a golden result needed for all further event studies, including 
this one. 
 
Through decades the impact of surprising news was tested with event study. Big fraction of those 
can  be  categorized  to  the  field  of  structural  changes.  For  instance,  the  merger  and  acquisition 
strategy disclosure was researched infinite number of times and, in general, showed the beneficial 
impact on shareholders wealth of target firm (Jarell et al., 1988; Ruback et al., 1983) and depressing 
effect for raiders firms (Jarell et al 1989). Nevertheless, lately, much more attention is devoted to 
managerial  strategies  announcement  investigations.  For  example,  the  expected  increase  in  stock 
prices were obtained after the announcement of huge celebrity involvement in companies activities 
(Agrawal,  1995).  Another  metaphor  of  unexpected  announcement  is  used  in  investigating  the 
overall countries' stock market behavior after the natural disaster (N.Luo, 2012). The  significant 
results  occurred  only  in  separate  industries,  while  no  overall  effect  was  captured.  Event    study 

 
 
 

12 

evaluation of the reaction to managerial practices became repeatedly performed, but, interestingly, 
yielded often different results based on the sample, test and clusters they use. One evidence is clear, 
the event study methodology went much further than usual corporate strategies evaluations. 
 
2.3          EVENT STUDIES IN SPONSORSHIP  
   
Reactions  on  company's  decision  to  engage  in  sponsorship  activities  have  received  broaden 
attention lately. With increasing sponsorship deals, there is also increasing number of attempts to 
measure  its  impact  on  the  wealth  of  shareholders. While  sponsorship  is  a  marketing  strategy,  its 
specificity is the absence of perfectly obvious slogan suggested to public. Consequently, it provides 
analysts a spare field for interpretations. The  
long-run value of sponsorship should be measured by whole list of factors: starting from accounting 
ratios  changes  and  finishing  with  hardly  capturable  modifications  in  people's  perception  of  the 
company's  pursuits.  It  is  a  prolonged  process  of  analysis,  so  researchers  came  up  with  the 
alternative method of evaluating the expected profitability - event study. 
 
Vast  number  of  works  attempted  to  investigate  the  effect  of  sponsorship  announcement  on 
company's value.  It is assumed that if the public accepts the announced decision as a favourable 
one- the prices will show significant positive abnormal return, and vice versa. 
Sport or event sponsorship is question of study of many works. Past researches considered different 
issues, such as impact of hosting mega-events as FIFA World Cup and Olympic Games (X.Li, 2007; 
Martins  et  al,  2007;  Tsioutsou  et.  al.  2005),  becoming  the  official  major  league's  sport  sponsor 
(Cornwell et.al.  ) and acquisition of titles of arenas (Clark et.al, 2002; Clark et al, 2009; Janney 
et.al, 2013). These works try to complement each other and make broader conclusions on factors 
impacting the result.  
 
Concentrating on the stadium sponsorship literature, one can define several works devoted to this 
issue. The paper by A. Johson (2009) investigated the impact of 51 sponsorship announcement on 
companies in Australia. Using the usual event study methodology the researcher obtained neutral 
overall  results  on  the  economic  wealth  of  shareholders.  The  constantly  accelerating  number  of 
signed contracts for stadium sponsorship are not consistent with the obtained results. In fact, this 
paradoxal outcome was received by several studies and all of them had one common characteristics: 
the  research  was  designed  without  accounting  for  broad  differences  in  the  companies  and, 

 
 
 

13 

consequently,  investors  in  the  study. A.Johnson  highlightened  the  need  to  pay  more  attention  to 
variables impacting the change in returns. Janney et. al. (2013) contributes to this idea in the study 
which used 203 sponsorship announcements and implemented more deep research  of naming rights 
acquisition using as well the usual event study technique. The results they obtained also suggest that 
there is insignificant overall impact, while by dividing the sample according to the relatively new 
contract deals, existance of other similar contracts in company's past, level of proficiency of league 
and effect on college league. Two out of five categories showed significant results  reflecting that 
companies with past experience in such sponsorship show more significant abnormal return   than 
others.  Moreover,  ANOVA  test  showed  that  major  leagues  stadiums  sponsorships  tend  to  be 
perceived as more beneficial compared to minor ones. Other categories did not show any significant 
impact.  This  suggests  that  sub  cathegorisation  approach  can  lead  to  more  broadened  conclusion 
about  the  perception  of  event,  as  the  overall  effect  can  be  off-set  due  to  numerous  other  factors 
involved.  
 
Clark et al. (2003) state that ''it is impossible to effectively ascertain the actual strength (or even the 
direction) of the correlation between stadium sponsorship announcements and share prices. This is 
because  no  efforts  were  undertaken  to  analyze  the  impact  of  stadium-  and  arena-naming-rights 
announcements  in  isolation'  (Clark  et  al,  2003).  49  observations  were  examined,  including  only 
sports  with  NFL,  NBA,  NHL  MLB  teams  connected  to  it.  Using  usual  technique  of  finding 
abnormal  returns  via  OLS  market  model  and  event  window  [-25;  +50].  They  received  positive 
significant effect in the day of announcement using the chategorisation principle as well as captured 
significant  result  depending  on  sharacteristics.  Marikova  et.al.  (2007)  proved  the  importance  of 
examining  factors  separately    by  taking  the  same  sample  as  the  one  by  Clark  et.al  (2003)  and  
analysing  only  overall  companies'  performance.  The  result  suggested  insignificant  cummulative 
effect. The main trigger of such disparity lies in the fact that the earlier approach accounted for ten 
firm-specific factors, while the latter did not acknowledge the importance of using chategorization 
of sample data. 
 
Calrk et al (2003) suggest in their analysis that this reasonably proves not only the value changing 
effect  of  such  deals,  but  also  that  investors'  perception  depend  on  much  peculiar  factors  and  by 
investigating  them  the  managers  could  account  for  such  psychological  effects  in  their  future  
decisions.  
The  existing  literature  on  naming  rights  aquisition  makes  some  clear  insights  in  solving  the 

 
 
 

14 

phenomenon  of  initial  results  impliying  neutral  reaction  of  shareholders  by  delving  deeper  in 
possible individual firms' characteristics as well as explanations of psychological patterns followed 
by investors. Consequently, eventhough this field had some investigations, it is still widely opened 
for next research which will keep in mind all the suggestions of the previous researchers. 
 
 
2.4           CONCLUSIONS 
 
The event study methodology is on the one hand rather new methodology, but, on the other hand, 
highly applied during these decades to various investigations. The main works are centered around 
corporate strategy announcement, but, especially lately, the increased use of event study is observed 
in  management.  During  the  last  decades  numerous  modifications  happened  in  event  study 
methodology, implying the extension of tests and loosening assumptions. The studies evaluate in a 
positive manner, implying that more drawbacks are controlled for. Still, the methodology is often 
non-accurately  used  and  miss-specified  conclusions  are  made.  For  example,  studies  on  similar 
samples tend to show different effects. Researchers give advise on separating data under analysis 
according to particular characteristics, as, they say, result heavily depends on that. Consequently, 
event study is fast method of observing the strategy effect, but still needs deeper insights on how to 
increase the reliability of the observed results. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

15 

DATA COLLECTION 

3            METHODOLOGY 
 
This chapter will be devoted to the research methodology. In the first part I will provide information 
on the way the data is collected, data sample is determined  and windows for the furhter study are 
outlined. Then, I will go by introducing the steps connected to abnormal returns calculation. The 
third part of chapter is devoted to discussion of the method which is more likely to give reliable 
results in this case. The fourth part is description of Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test for determination 
of  significance  of  abnormal  returns.  Next,  the  chapter  will  continue  with  outlining  K-means 
clusterization and the final part describes the Quetelet index. 
 
 
3.1 
 
One of the main requirements that event study methodology sets in order to receive valuable results 
is  the  accuracy  of  the  collected  data.  As  McWilliams  et.  al.  (1997)  state,  the  only  information 
needed for the event study are names of traded firms, event dates and stock prices. As much as it 
may seem as easy to implement, it crucially depends on the precision of the data. 
 
The initial step was to find the list of all stadiums which signed official naming rights dealership. It 
was done through web-resources and was carefully checked on each official stadium's site in the 
section  which  describes  its  history.  (Sports  Business:  Professional  Sports,  List  of  Sports  Venues 
with Sole Naming Rights, Financial History of the New York Giants). In attempt to minimize bias 
that can arise due to extreme difference in preferences, characteristics of sport, size and number of 
venues and possible culturological traditions with respect to such events, I limited my research with 
stadiums in United States of America and Canada.  
 
Next, the venues in the list showed too many variations in their applications, meaning, most of them 
were used for football, basketball and other sports and concerts, while others could be auto racing 
speedways, venues for exhibitions and so on. Again, for accuracy reasons the facilities for multi-
purpose and those focused on football, basketball, ice-hockey and baseball were left, others being 
excluded from the study. Moreover, only the facilities in the capacity range of 18 000 to 85 000 
seats were under consideration due to visible distinction of venues with lower capacity with respect 
to frequency, importance of events, location, purposes, etc. 

 
 
 

16 

located in the United States of America or Canada 
used either mainly in football, basketball, baseball, hockey or in multi-purpose (ability to 

 
Further, the accurate announcement date was collected. The announcement date is the official date 
that the press releases the information to the public. Several official internet news providers were 
used, among them were Sportsbusinessdaily.com, The Wall Street Journal, NBC News and others. 
Announcement  dates  that  were  impossible  to  be  determined  precisely  were  excluded  from  the 
research. 
 
Due to the fact that precise daily stock market prices were needed for the research, companies that 
are not traded on stock exchange were also eliminated from the study. Moreover, one of the crutial 
factor  needed  to  be  accounted  for  is  the  absence  of  compounded  effect  (McWilliams  and  Siegel 
(1997), meaning that the event is isolated from  other events effects. Those companies who were 
evidently  incorporated  in  some  other  significant    activities,  such  as,  for  example,  merger  and 
acquisition, during the period around naming rights deal were also excluded from the study. 
 
Consequently,  the  list  of  objects  with  corporate  names  in  this  study  all  satisfied  the  following 
criteria: 
• 
• 
host  multiple types of sports and concerts) 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
The sample that occured by the end of sorting, comprised 39 objects with details provided in Table 
1 in the Appendix. 
 
3.2 
 
After the sample of facilities and corresponding companies were identified, the daily stock market 
prices were obtained from Datastream.  
 
The analysis of price behaviour is based on two period: event window and estimations window.  
 
 
 

ranged [18 000; 85 000] in the number of seats 
connected to the accurate date of announcement in the official press 
isolated from other event effect within the company 
traded publicly on stock exchange 

      ABNORMAL RETURNS CALCULATION 

17 

Considering that 'event' is the day of the announcement (also described as t=0), the event window 
can consist of that day only or several days around the event might be included. Brown and Warner 
(1985) found that the power of the test decreases in the event window of (-5;+5) compared to just 
day  0.  In  order  to  control  more  the  significance  of  event,  literature  suggests  using  smaller  event 
windows in case of certain announcement dates (MacKinlay, 1997 ; Brown et al, 1985; McWilliams 
et al, 1997). For the same reason and implying the assumption that no leakage of infomation prior to 
the announcemet occured, this study uses announcement date [0] as event window.It consists only 
from  the    announcement  day  as  the  precise  dates  of  announcement  were  found  and  stock  prices 
should capture the effect immediately if market efficiency is assumed. 
 
The  estimation  period  is  the  period  used  to  measure  the  expected  returns  for  the  event  period. 
MacKinlay  (1997) states that most often the period prior to the event window is used, excluding 
the event window itself. The estimation period length varies through studies, but if using market 
model  for  expected  return,  120-day  period  is  considered  to  be  enough.  In  this  study  150-days 
estimation period will be used. Estimation window is, thus, [-151;-2]. The gap of [-1] is included for 

observational purposes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

So,  the  estimation  window  is  used  to  find  excess  returns  during  around  the  announcement  and 
consequently determine whether they significantly reacted to the announcement. The event study 
approach assumes market to be efficient and thus expects stock market to reflect the reaction to the 
news fully and accurately. P. Drake et.al.(2010) state that empirical evidence prove US stock market 
to  be  at  least  semi-strong  form  efficient  (The  Basics  of  Finance:An  Introduction  to  Financial 
Markets,  Business  Finance  and  Portfolio  Management,  2010,  p.32),  while  Bank  of  Canada's 
research (2004) found the same evidence for Canadian stock exchange  (Scott Henry, Michael R. 
King, 'The Efficiency of Canadian Capital Market: Some Bank of Canada Research', 2004). So, we 
may rely on the fulfilment of this assumption within the following study.  
Hence,  the  analysis  of  the  magnitude  and  sign  of  the  reaction  comes  to  the  analysis  of  excess 
returns significance and direction. 

 
 
 

18 

 
Brown and Warner (1985) propose the following estimation of excess returns: 
 
• 

             

            where  

Mean Adjusted Return 
А

−

 

t

t

i

,

i

R
= ,
R

i

=

i

R
1
150

2

∑−

R
151

t

−=

i

,

t

 

• 

 
Market adjusted returns 
А

R

R

−

=

 

i

i

,

,

t

t

tm
,

             
             where Rm is the market index 
             
• 

OLS market model 
А

ˆ
ˆ βα−−
R

R

=

t

t

,

,

i

i

 

tm
,

           
 
While Brown and Warner (1985) state that if there exist abnormal returns than there is no difference 
in  obtained  results  depending  on  the  model  chosen,  the  other  existing  literature  on  event  studies 
suggests  that    the  most  accurate  and  oftenly  used  is  the  OLS  market  model.  MacKinlay  (1997) 
states that it shows increased ability to capture event effects. 
 
In this analysis the market model is implemented into practise, using for Rm,t S&P500 Composite 
weighted index for the returns measured for companies from the United States of America and other 
countries,  while  S&P/TSX  Composite  weighted  index  is  used  for  Canadian  stocks.  The  data  is 
obtained from Datastream. The index was used throughout the  estimation window with respect to 
the date, to estimate coefficients and, thus, apply them for abnormal returns for the event window. 
The  coefficients  were  estimated  using  Eviews  5.  Binder  (1998)  states  that  coefficients  can  be 
assumed  to  be  constant  during  the  event  window.  Further,  for  each  company  the  obtained 
coefficients were used to find the expected return based on the market model. Finally, the excess 
returns were calculated along the [-1; 0] window as a difference between the observed return and 
the calculated expected one.  
The obtained abnormal returns for each company can be observed for the period [-1;0] where period 
t=-1 is included for comparison purposes, in Table 2 in Appendix. 
 

 
 
 

19 

Parametric tests 

Non-parametric tests 

DETERMINATION OF TEST ON SIGNIFICANCE 

3.3 
 
There are numerous methods to test significance of results, which also imply different underlying 
assumptions. Generally, tests in event study on significance of abnormal returns can be devided into 
two categories: 
 
• 
 
These tests are based on the assumption that the abnormal returns are jointly normal and identically 
independently distributed through time for all securities. Researcher should calculate cummulative 
abnormal returns  and define their significance by  implementing the t-statistics. There are several 
extentions which use standardization technique, for example test introduced by Patell (1976), which 
standardizes  abnormal  returns  by  their  deviations  from  the  estimation  period.  Standardization  is 
used in order to satisfy the equal variance conditions. One of the characteristics of parametric tests 
is that they are also effected by existance of outliers, while those outliers should not be eliminated 
from the study due to their possible importance. 
 
• 
 
These tests are robust to data from non-normal distributions. The characteristics of non-parametric 
tests  is  absense  of  dependance  on  normal  distribution  requirement,  so  they  are  also  called 
'distribution-free  test'.  They  are  not  affected  by  the  existance  of  outliers  due  to  their  nature. 
Generally,  non-parametric  tests  are  either  sign  or  rank  tests.  Cowan  et  al.  (1992)    propose 
generalised  sign  test  which  hypotheses  that  proportion  of  positive  abnormal  returns  is  equal 
between  estimation  period  and  event  period  and  is  immune  to  asymmetry  of  AR  distribution. 
Corrado (1989) proposed rank test, which assigns every abnormal return its rank and hypothesizes 
that  it  is  equal  to  the  expected  rank  equal  to  (T+1)/2,  where  T  is  the  maximum  rank.  There  is 
evidence that rank test loses power for the prolonged periods for CAR (for example 20-days event 
window),  but  if  the  period  is  short  it  has  proved  to  be  robust  with  respect  to  volatility  and 
clusterings.  
 
 
Though parametric method is widely used in big samples, the assumption of normality of abnormal 
20 
 
 
 

returns  is  too  restrictive.  Binder  (1998)  states  that  the  hypothesis  testing  becomes  problematic, 
because often the abnormal return estimators are not independent or do not have identical varience. 
McWilliams et al. (1997) analyze the main flows in managemental application to event study and 
define the neccessary steps the researcher needs to follow in order to get the reasonable result. They 
highlight importance of using non parametric test at least at the end of each research, to identify 
outliers in cases when normality assumption is applied to abnormal returns, due to evidence that 
event  studies  are  effected  by  outliers,  especially  in  the  small  samples.  Fama  (1976)  states  that 
abnormal returns show fatter tails and skewness to the rights comparing to the normal distribution.  
 
There  exist  many  extensions  and  complementations  to  the  methods  outlined  above,  but  the 
conclusion that can be derived from analysing the listed works is that the test on significance of 
abnormal returns should be non-parametric, especially in sample size, like in this study. Moreover, 
literature suggests that non-parametric tests outperform parametric ones due to their immunity to 
volatility and clusterings, while parametric tests are strictly dependant on distribution assumption, 
effected by variance behaviour of abnormal returns and impacted by outliers. Due to the evidence 
that abnormal returns tend not to be identically independently normally distributed in reality (Fama 
1976)  I  expect  higher  precision  of  my  results  by  using  non-parametric  test,  which  satisfies  the 
outlined requirements for robustness of outcomes. 
 
3.4       MWW TEST FOR SIGNIFICANCE OF ABNORMAL RETURNS 
 
The MWW test, or Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test, also known as Wilcoxon rank-sum test, is a non-
parametric test of difference of two populations against alternative that one stochastically exceeds 
the other. Using additional assumption of identical shape of distributions, Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney 
one-sided test checks whether  two populations significantly differ and, if yes, which one exceeds. 
The test is a non-parametric alternative to independent means t-test. The difference in populations in 
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test is called a location shift.  
 
The proper computation of Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney is based on the following procedure.  
 
Assumpions required are: 
 
• 
 
 
 

F1 and F2  are from the identical continuous distribution 

21 

F1 (x) = F2 (x-Ɵ)  , i.e. two populations differ only in their location 
F1 and F2 are mutually independent 

• 
• 
 
Hypothesis can be written as: 
           H0:     Ɵ = 0              
           Ha:     Ɵ > 0 
The test is based on investigating the existance of what is called a location shift (Ɵ). In other words, 
if  the  distributions  of  two  samples  are  the  same,  one  can  determine  the  centres  of  location,  for 
example if Ɵ is  significantly greater than zero, then F2 is shifted to the left from F1 as in the figure 
2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test is based on the following idea. Having two samples, call one sample 
A and the second sample B. Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney combines sample A and sample B into one 
combined sample and assigns each observation corresponsing rank. Then, ranks attributed to each 
sample  are  summed.  The  larger  summed  rank  between  samples  is  used  to  test  for  critical  value 
table: 

WMW

=

n

∑

j

1
=

jYR
)(

 

 
where Y is sample which makes higher sum of ranks from the combined sample. 
 
The  aim  of  event  study  technique  is  to  determine  the  significance  of  departure  of  observed 
abnormal returns from zero during the  event period. Friedman (1937) stated, normal distribution is 
22 
 
 
 

rather an exception than a rule with social and economic data. This test is highly powerful for non-
normal data and shows efficiency of 0.95 comparing to t-test, which is considered as rather high.  
 
Applying the methodology to this study, the actual returns will be compared to expected returns, in 
other words, observed abnormal returns will be compared with zero abnormal returns. Assuming 
that both samples come from the identical distribution, the significant departure between them is 
understood  as  a  location  shift  of  actual  abnormal  returns  from  zero.    If  the  sample  of  abnormal 
returns  exceeds  sample  of  zero  abnormal  returns  than  abnormal  returns  are  significantly 
positive.The  nature  of  this  study  implies  clustering  the  data  by  different  characteristics,  so,  the 
sample  of  39  observations  is  divided  into  smaller  clusters  and  in  small  sample  case  WMM  test 
rearly spuriously indicates significance relative to other tests. 
 
First,  I  would  analyze  the  significance  of  abnormal  returns  comparing  the  shift  of  observed 
abnormal returns sample and zero abnormal returns. This will be repeated for each cluster, so the 
effect of  announcement  will be examined for  companies with respect to their characteristics (for 
example,  impact  of  the  announcement    first  for  S&P500  components,  then  for  S&P500  non-
components and so on for each cluster). The sign of the departure will be analysed, so I chose one-
sided alternative hypothesis. This allows to determine whether the significant location shift exists 
and in which direction. 
 
Further, I will apply the same technique between some clusters, varifying whether abnormal returns 
of one cluster are observably different from the other (for example, difference in abnormal returns 
between  components  of  S&P500  and  non-components  of  S&P500  and,  if  yes,  which  is  higher). 
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test is immune to differences in sample sizes and outliers, so it can be 
relied on. Thus, I aim to capture the significant location shifts and their sign, if they exist, and verify 
whether the magnitude of stocks reaction to the announcement of naming rights acquisition may be 
attributed to difference in characteristics of clusters.  
 
 3.5          K-MEANS CLUSTERING 
                            
The  key  idea  of  clustering  analysis  is  to  find  how  data  can  be  accurately  divided  into  groups  in 
order to apply different algorythms with respect to group's main properties. Vast number of theories 
are developed about what should be the basics of division into clusters, but k-means clustering is 

 
 
 

23 

one of the most sound ones. 
 
K-mean clustering, the centre of works  of McQueen (1967), Lloyd (1982), Ball and Hall (1965), is 
a method of clustering which portions n observations into k clusters in a way that minimizes the 
squared  errors  between  the  observation  and  its  nearest  centroid.  The  k-means  algorythm 
(McQueen,1967) attributes each cluster its centroid and then places every observation in the cluster 
to the closest one. Then the new centroid within the cluster is found and the procedure of placing 
the observation to its closest centroid is repeated until centroids are fixed and no changes occur. So, 
it minimizes the within cluster sum of squares, over all  clusters: 
 

arg

k

min
S ∑ ∑
Sx
= ∈
1

i

x

j

2
−m  

i

j

i

 
This clustering method allows to find clusters with the smallest squared errors between observation 
and  the  centroid.  Consequently,  it  is  a  method  which  groups    most  similar  observations  into  k 
clusters. 
 
In this study, MATLAB R2012B is used. I decided to impose k=3 as it will give the broader insights 
of  properties  of  observations. The  k-mean  clustering  assigned  each  company  to  one  of  the  three 
centroids.  It  will  minimize  the  distance  between  the  observation  and  its  nearest  centroid,  so 
abnormal returns of all companies in the study will be portioned within 3 groups. Now, eliminating 
the specificities defined by type of contract and psychological perception of investor, but analysing 
on  the  basis  of  shared  closest  centroid,  we  do  the  same  Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney  technique  in 
evaluating the significance and sign of the location shift from normal returns in case of each k-mean 
cluster. We, then, compare clusters in pairs to find whether and how are k-mean clusters different 
from each other, again by the same technique. 
 
The expected effect of implementation of three clusters division is proving significant impact on 
clusters'  stock  prices.  This  could  lead  to  evidence  that  there  exist  groups  of  companies  which 
experience  statistically  significant  negative  or  positive  effect  depending  on  centroid  they  are 
assigned to.  
 
 
 
 
 

24 

3.6          THE QUETELET INDEX 
 
After  the  results  are  obtained,  and  we  do  expect  them  to  show  significant  evidence,  this  study 
continues with  Mirkin (2011) refers to as capturing relationships with Quetlet index. 
 
Mirkin  (2011)  defines  the  baseline  of  Quetlet  index  as  strategy  for  visualisation  of  correlation 
patterns in contingency tables without removal of 'non-fitting entities'. 
He  describes  the  calculation  on  the  following  example:  assume  the  probability  of  getting 
tuberculosis  is  0.1%.  Investigate  the  bad  housing  conditions  impact  on  probability  of  getting 
tuberculosis  by  finding  the  rate  of  tuberculosis  decease  among  bad  housing  conditions,  say,  you 
receive  0.5%.  The  index  by  Quetlet  can  be  found  as  q(1/k)=  (0.5-0.1)/0.1=4,  meaning  that  the 
change of rate of getting tuberculosis increases 400% if the bad housing condition is present. 
 
The Quetlet index in my study will enable me define the correlation pattern by the same logic. The 
question of interest is how being in particular characteristics cluster affects the rate of occuring in 
the  k-mean  cluster  with  significant  positive  or  negative  abnormal  returns.  In  other  words,  I  will 
attempt  to  find  which  characteristics  of  the  deal  and  in  which  magnitude  impact  probability  of 
occuring in the shareholders' wealth-enhancing or wealth-depressing group of companies. This will 
provide  me  with  deeper    understanding  of  investors  multi-criterial  approach  in  evaluatinf  such 
announcements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

25 

 
4          HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT 
 
This  study  will  examine  company's  stock  market  performance  at  the  news  date  according  to 
numerous characteristics which can impact investors expectations. Clark et al (2003) suggest further 
event studies to divide the data according to multiple characteristics in order to increase probability 
of  capturing  the  effect  of  the  announcement.  Considering  this,  I  introduce  extended  number  of 
factors that should be analyzed for broader insight of the study. The sample will be clustered with 
respect  to  each  factor  performance,  whose  characteristics,  I  believe,  may  impact  the  investors 
beliefs. The factors and further division is shown in Table 3. 
 

Factor 

 S&P 500 

 Price of rights 
 Capacity of stadium 

  
 Industry 

 Capacity of stadium 

  
 Type of sport  

 Level of team league 

Clusters 

Non-component 
Component 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Beer and food 
Financial 
Others 
Small 
Big 
Basketball 
Football 
Hockey 
Baseball and athletics 
Professional 
University 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

 
                       Table  5.  Factors  and  corresponding  clusters  applied  in  the  announcement  reaction 
study 
 
Following the factors characteristics, I assigned each observation the number corresponding to the 
certain characteristics. For example, if company is S&P500 component it was assigned '1', while 
non-component  was  followed  by  '0'.  In  the  case  of  ratios,  the  information  on  ranges  defined  to 
clusters within factors can be found in the Table 2  in appendix.  

 
 
 

26 

 
 4.1           S&P 500 
 
Separation of effects between companies which are included in the index from those who are not is 
derived from the fact that the beliefs of investors might be impacted by whether the company is 
listed in the index of 500 most demonstrative companies in their field or not. It might be perceived 
by investors as a signal of stability and quality and, consequently, might lead to less shaking beliefs 
about reasonability of their actions.  The  fact, that the  company is listed in the index, which is used 
in most studies as a market proxy, can make investor believe, that the company is quality-checked, 
that it had numerous actions in past and proved to be reasonable  and stable eventually, that it is 
concerned about  manager's actions and all the consequences which can arise. 
 
Not being in the list might raise doubtfulness of reasoning of such action, as so, they might be more 
sceptical of company's decisions.This situation might reflect what was mentioned in agency cost 
theory developed by Jensen and Meckling (1976). Rather then enhancing future returns, executives 
might engage in actions aimed to increase their own well-being at the cost of company. 
'Enterprenour or manager in a firm with mixed financial structure will choose a set of activities for 
the firm such that the total value of the firm is less than it would be if he were the sole owner' 
(Jensen, Michael C.; Meckling, William H. (1976). "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, 
Agency Costs and Ownership Structure". Journal of Financial Economics 3 (4): 305–360). Every 
contract signed in the naming right partnership also provides with the set of v.i.p. seats, free tickets 
to all the events within venue and possibility to meet famous people. This set of luxurious 
opportunities might be more attractive to managers than well-being of company after the  
investment. At the same time, the  announcement of acquisition of naming rights for S&P500 
components is not expected to rise such doubts due to confidence in awareness of company's 
actions. 
 
 Moreover, the companies listed in the index tend to have larger spector of marketing activities in 
the past, with already known pecularities of outcome, either by their own experience, or by the 
experience of similar companies. The idea of investors' uncertainty about the creation of new 
environment  might as well impact. The non-listed companies seem to lack previous experience in 
such specific marketing stategies, particulary, the acquisition of naming rights. Investors might face 
adoption of new strategy as an additional  threat to company if they find future results to be 

 
 
 

27 

ambiguous. Behavioural sociology suggests that the uncertainty is absorbed with increase in amount 
of similar experience around. The individuals and institutions tend to derive their attitude through 
experience of others, so, innovations are absorbed into collective 'awareness' with time. This idea is 
the baseline of so called 'bandwagon' effect, which was adressed in famous work of  Abrahamson 
and Rosenhopf (1993). They found that any technological, organizational or strategic innovation 
with ambiguous returns can deffuse in a bandwagon manner. Refering to this study, the uncertainty 
of result of acquisition of naming rights may be consequence of absense of such practise in the 
similar surrounding environment and might be eliminated through time by increasing number of its 
adoption into practise. 
 
Components of S&P500 included in this study show considerable amount of previous naming right 
deals. As so, almost 40 per cent of the companies in the cluster named 'S&P500 component' 
experienced at least one such acquisition in past, moreover, some of them performed up to three 
naming rights deals. The  multiple reiteration of the same kind of deal might affect impression about 
subsequent effect on companies' brand. This may be assumed to be a signal to the rest of the similar 
companies and decrease in the amount of uncertainty due to increased awareness of the following 
impact. Consequently, companies with quite similar characteristics develop less frightening attitude 
to such action and become more enthusiastic on implementing the same action and achieve 
beneficitial results. As such, companies from S&P500  might have increased awereness of the good 
brand signal stadium naming might provide and, moreover, might find it as opportunity to provide 
business partners with more casual environment for making future deals. At the same time, only 8 
per cent of non-listed companies experienced such acquisition and no multiple-naming contracts are 
observed. This might suggest that the strategy is rather new for these companies and the effect is 
still ambiguous for them. Consequently, the following effects will be examined: 
 
HYPOTHESES: 
 
H01,  02:  The  announcement  of  acquisition  of  stadium  naming  rights  has  no  impact  on  returns  of 
S&P500   component   (S&P500 non-component) 
 
HA1: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has positive  impact on returns of  
S&P500   component   
HA2: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has negative  impact on returns of 

 
 
 

28 

S&P500   non-component   
HA3: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights by S&P500 components has higher 
impact than by S&P500 non-component 
 
4.2          PRICE-TO-CAPACITY RATIO  
 
The three cathegories depending on the ratio of price of contract to capacity of stadium in the 
contract were included in order to examine the way investors look at the price invested per seat. The  
factor which affected the choice of three categories, rather than one, in this casstudye, is, first of all, 
very observable clusterization of data into three ratio levels, which might show the existance of 
some pattern. As the price of naming rights-to-capacity can be viewed as a degree the company is 
willing to invest in such contract, this might be perceived as the  phenomenon 'stuck-in-the-middle  
strategy'. The concept was firstly introduced by Michael Porter (1980), who defined business 
strategies in three main types. He suggests that if one aims to fix his competitive marketplace he 
should implement certain pathway. By deviding companies in three types according to their market 
share, he observed the following results. The highest market share companies received profits due 
to their strategy, implying increase in the size, scale and scope. The lowest market share also 
received profits due to specializing on certain category of the market and implementing direct 
strategies on it. However, companies with the middle market share performed lowest profitability 
due to lack of generic strategy The absence of generic strategy implies that company is confused 
about the path it should use, so it implements the strategy  in between.That might also be the line of 
reasoning of investor's behaviour  in this study. 
 
The middle category might be percieved by investors as the one stuck-in-between with no generic 
strategy. This might highlight to investors the inability to focus on concrete aims of companies' 
future and thus is perceived as the most value reducing. Paying relatively a lot for seat might be due 
to soundness and magnitude of dealership, paying relatively cheap is a opportunity to increase 
brand awareness without huge costs. As for middle,  investors might find it as mimicing other 
institutions' actions while being limited in concrete idea of company's goals. DiMagiio and Powell 
(1983)  suggest that uncertainty is often a startline of mimicing pattern: when organizational 
technologies are poorly understood (March and Olsen, 1976), when goals are ambiguous, or when 
the environment creates symbolic uncertainty, organization might model themselves on other 
organizations (DiMaggio et al, 1983)).  

 
 
 

29 

As  a  result,  investors  may  think  that  companies  engage  in  naming  rights  deals  not  because  they 
evalute them as efficiency-increasing, but due to unambiguity of their situation and attempt to solve 
it by repeating this action after other corporations. 
 
The high price deals might be perceived as aim to acquire sound branding strategy which means 
highly demanded stadiums and more spotlight on the deal. That might suggests that company is 
more aware of the effect of the dealership, so the negative reaction is less likely expected,  but 
profitability of such strategy depends on how well will the cash flows be paid back. 
 
The low price of rights-to-capacity level might be perceived as aim to achieve certain marketing 
goals  while not putting  all the weight of brand  on it. This might also be viewed by investors as 
strategy of  
 
 
HYPOTHESES: 
 
H01,  02,  03: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has no impact on returns of 
companies with low/middle/high level of costs paid per seat 
 
HA2: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has negative  impact on returns of 
companies with middle level of costs paid per seat 
 
 
 4.3             SECTOR 
 
This  factor  was  included  because  the  opportunity  to  exploit  the  stadium  is  not  the  same  for  all 
sectors. 
First of all stock market participants are expected to evaluate cost-benefit side of this strategy. The 
difference between sector's opportunities to increase profitability within the stadium arises from the  
fact  that,  eventhough  all  of  them  have  their  logos,  advertisments  and  brand  names  all  over    the 
facility, only few can increase rapidly sales directly within the stadium.  
The disbelief in the project of naming right dealership might arise if the reason of this strategy to 
lead to progressive profitability is unclear. The science of marketing defines the concept of strategic 

 
 
 

30 

compatibility of sponsorship as the extent to which partner has complementary goals (Amis at al., 
2005).  
 
The stadium title contracts with brewing and food industry always include the exclusive right of 
being the sole provider of drinks and snacks within the stadium area. This means that during each 
game only comany's menu is provided and purchased. It might reflect the opportunity for surging 
sales during  games and  championships. The brewing  company  and sport fans is  rather harmonic 
combination and investors might additionally perceive this as a sign of high awareness of clientelle 
ond opportunity to increase sales by providing the product within the stadium.  
 
 For financial institutions such opportunity is limited by the nature of their activity. The maximum 
they can exploit specific to their field is cash points and ability to pay with their credit cards. There 
is no obvious way to increase the volume of sales of financial service directly, rather than with time. 
Such strategy might be  not obvious in its success for investors and thus might be viewed as an 
investment not worth its costs.  
 
The  sector  'others'  comprises  industries  that  occur  less  frequently  in  naming  right  deals,  such  as 
cable  providers,  telecommunications,  airlines,  etc. This  category  seems  to  be  in  between,  as,  for 
example, telecommunication companies have opportnity to increase sales by equipping the stadium 
with its brand's technology and services, while still not expecting to do that on the constant basis. 
 
Thus,  financial  sector  being  the  only  one  which  indirectly  increases  sales  with  such  dealership  
might confuse investors  with the future benefits  of the deal.  The brewing  and  food company is 
expected to face positive reaction. The sectors others is also expected to react positively rather than 
negatively. 
 
 
 
HYPOTHESES: 
 
H01,  02,  03: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has no impact on returns of 
companies within Brewing and Food / Financial / 'Other' sector 
 

 
 
 

31 

HA1: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has positive  impact on returns of 
companies within Brewing sector 
HA2: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has negative impact on returns of 
companies within Financial sector 
HA3: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has positive impact on returns of 
companies within 'Others' sector 
 
HA4:  The  announcement  of  acquisition  of  stadium  naming  rights  has  larger  positive  impact  on 
returns of companies within Brewing Sector than Financial Sector 
HA5:  The  announcement  of  acquisition  of  stadium  naming  rights  has  larger  positive  impact  on 
returns of companies within Brewing Sector than 'Others' Sector 
 
4.4           CAPACITY 
 
The stadiums which sell naming rights vary considerably in the number of seats provided. Some 
consist  of  20  000  seats,  while  others-more  than  80  000.  The  soundness  of  those  deals  is  not 
equivalent,  implying  the  difference  in  attendancy  rate  as  well  as  opportunities  to  host  various 
events. It is expected that reactions to those announcements may differ. As high-capacity stadiums 
are  more  often  under  the  media  spotlight  and  are  usually  applied  to  multiple-events,  there  is 
possibility that investors react differently. Small capacities might not be expected to cover all the 
costs  of  contract.  The  cut-off  came  to  40  000  seats  as  it  is  the  line  which  most  observably 
differentiates stadiums by their opportunities of hosting the events and media attention. 
 
The inclusion of such cathegorising come from probability that investors may perceive big stadiums 
as an investment with higher probability to cover the expenses due to higher exposure to public. 
While the majority of stadiums can be used in multiple purposes for both sizes, the expandable 
capacity for occuring events is obviously much more limited for small stadiums. Usually, the 
football stadium is also applicable for basketball, athletics and concerts, while ice hockey stadiums 
is usually limited by skating activities. 
 Moreover, almost all of the events occuring in large and small stadiums differ drastically. For 
example, in the sample used in this study, stadiums in the upper group are more often the hosts to 
large events, such as annual Belk Bowl Championship in Bank of America Stadium, run up for 
2006 FIFA World Cup in First Energy Stadium, Justin Timberlakes' stop in his tour in M&T Bank 

 
 
 

32 

Stadium in 2013. Some of these facilities are expandable up to 82 000 seats, for cases such as 
Manchester United versus F.C.Barcelona game in FedEx Field in 2011, when the stadium did not 
have one spare seat.  
 
As for category of small capacity, they also provide opportunity to be transformed from mainly 
football facility to a concert arena, but the amount of attracted public for one event is limited and 
thus are limited opportunities of hosting the most sound events happening in area. Due to the fact 
that acquisition of naming rights of stadiums is pretty direct marketing strategy aiming to increase 
brand soundness and attract market share in more rapid way then usual marketing schemes offer, 
investors might disapprove acquisition of small-capacity stadiums' name. The  investment even in 
small stadium is rather costly, sometimes the same price is attributed to 20 000 and 65 000 seats 
deals, as in case of Air Canada Arena and Ford Field, for the very different impact they later 
perform. So, there might be sceptical attitute of investors to such announcement as to costly 
marketing strategy not to be benefitial  enough. 
 
H01,  02:  The  announcement  of  acquisition  of  stadium  naming  rights  has  no  impact  on  returns  of 
companies acquiring big / small capacity stadiums 
 
HA1: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has positive   impact on returns of 
companies acquiring big capacity stadium 
HA2: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has negative  impact on returns of 
companies acquiring small capacity stadium 
 
4.5           TYPE OF SPORT   
 
The stadiums, even the multiple-use ones, are always focused mainly on one sport events. Thus, 
every facility can be attributed one certain sport it usually hosts and is most famous for. Four blocks 
refer to basketball, football, hockey and baseball.The reaction to the announcement might be prone 
to the type of sport the facility is based on. Factors which can affect the reaction depending on this 
factor are popularity of the sport among public or unreasonably high   difference in average costs of 
deal. 
 
Investors might react positively to baseball but negatively to basketball if those sports significantly 

 
 
 

33 

Nielson TV ratings: 

According to sites visits: 

US Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the US,2012 provides the following rating: 

differ in popularity  within the area. Nevertheless, the rankings of sport popularity  give uncertain  
information on the their rank:  
• 
1.basketball 
2.baseball 
5.football 
6.hockey 
• 
1.football 
2.basketball 
3.baseball 
8.hockey 
• 
1.football 
2.baseball 
3.basketball 
4.hockey 
 
The  fluctuations  in  ranking  positions  suggest  that  there  is  non-stable  and  not  absolutely  certain 
rating among sports. Only hockey can be defined as definitely the least popular among them. With 
rather equal popularity among public and similar frequency of games occurance, the high difference 
in payments for stadiums might be considered  unreasonable.  
 
I examined the average price of football stadium contract with respect to the average price of other 
type of sport deals within the sample in this study. In general, naming rights contracts connected to 
stadiums with focus on football events, show higher average cost than others. The figures reflect the 
following costs:  average yearly price paid for football stadiums is approximately $5.73 million, for 
basketball stadiums $2.7 million, for hockey arenas $2.6 million and for baseball $2.3 million. This 
shows  reasonable  difference  in  average  annual  payments.  In  order  to  compare  it  more  deeper,  I 
examined  the  average  percent  this  value  comprises  of  average  market  capitalization  of  the 
companies. For football the average price of deal reflects higher fraction: 0.04% of average market 
capitalization, while others make 0.005%, 0.008% and 0.002%, respectively.  
 
 
 
 

34 

Considering  that  the  big  events  in  the  sport  world  in  basketball,  baseball  and  football  happen 
approximately with equal frequency, investors might think such big costs for football facility not to 
be paid back completely in the form of future cash-flows. Thus, the diversity in reaction is probable, 
I expect football to be the most threatening to investors among the other equally popular sports. In 
the  same  time  other  sports  are  expected  to  face  positive  reactions  due  to  their  similarity  in  both 
popularity and rather small costs: 
 
H01, 02, 03, 04: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has no impact on returns of 
companies acquiring baseball/ hockey/ football/ basketball stadium 
 
HA1: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has negative impact on returns of 
companies acquiring football stadiums 
HA2: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has positive impact on returns of 
companies acquiring baseball stadiums 
HA3: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has positive impact on returns of 
companies acquiring basketball stadiums 
HA4: The announcement of acquisition of stadium naming rights has positive impact on returns of 
companies acquiring hockey  stadiums 
 
4.6         LEVEL OF TEAM LEAGUE 
 
Each stadium is home to some certain team while teams can be included into national league or 
institutional  league.  In  the  USA  and  Canada  the  importance  of  institutional  league  and  inter-
institutional  competitions  is  emphasized  traditionally.  However,  the  institutional  and  national 
leagues differ in their magnitude, so the difference in investors reaction might be expected. 
 
The choice of being a sponsor of stadium with University league may be considered as a support to 
such league more than a run for profitability increase. World's giving index 2011 named the US the 
most generous country in terms of donations and charitable activity among citizens, making it 65% 
of  population  who  gave  money  to  charity.  It  implies  appreciation  of  population  of  generous 
activities.  
Signalling  theory  by  Ross  (1977)  suggests  that  in  state  of  asymmetric  information,  where  the 
information is not equally available to each party, managers can use some signals in order to stress 

 
 
 

35 

the stability of the company to the investors. Here, the fact that millions of dollars are attributed to 
sponsorship  of  stadium,  which  are  not  expected  to  bring  huge  profitability  and  popularity  to  the 
company directly might emphasise the companies honorable intentions. This could be perceived as 
signal  of  company's  confidence  about  its  well-being  and  its  belief  that  it  can  comfortably  afford 
charitable activities. 
 
As  for  the  major  league,  the  acquisition  of  stadium  naming  rights  can  also  affect  perceptions  of 
investors. The major league is highly followed in the USA and Canada and participation in such 
dealership  might  hugely  increase  the  occurance  of  the  brand  name  on  the  television,  in  the 
newspapers,  as  well  as  increase  in  exposure  to  public  due  to  mass  events.  The  investors  might 
expect the media spotlight and connection to professional team to raise the brand awareness among 
consumers more rapidly. Consequently, the sales and profitability might be enhanced as well.  
 
Nevertheless,  the  aims  of  these  two  deals  might  be  perceived  differently.  The  University  league 
sponsorship, due to its charitable nature of support, might to be considered as an investment at all, 
rather,  just  a  signal  of  already  stable  prosperity  and  confidence  of  company. At  the  same  time, 
Major league stadiums might be understood as a project, whose costs need to be at least covered 
with expected future cash flows. Consequently, the different weight of signal might be noticed by 
investors and the following hypotheses are, thus, made: 
 
HYPOTHESES: 
H01,02:  The  announcement  of  acquisition  of  University  league  /  Major  League  Stadium  naming 
rights has no impact on returns of the acquiring company 
 
HA1:  The  announcement  of  acquisition  of  University  league  Stadium  naming  rights  has  positive  
impact on returns of the acquiring company 
 
HA2: The announcement of acquisition of Major League Stadium naming rights has positive impact 
on returns of the acquiring company 
 
HA3:  The  announcement  of  acquisition  of  University  League  Stadium  naming  rights  has  larger 
positive impact than acquisition of Major League Stadium on returns of the acquiring company 
 
 
 
 
 

36 

5           RESULTS 
 
The  following  chapter  will  be  devoted  to  analysis  of  the  obtained  results.  The  hypothesis  either 
supported the previous expectations or did not, in which case a discussion on possible factors of 
such  impact  was  made.  The  results  are  according  to  p-values  of  7  characteristics  of 
constractsclusters,  3  artificially  defined  by  k-menas,  the  Quetlet  Index  results  are  explained  and 
advice for future contracts, as a 'secret to success' will be provided.The list of p-values for all the 
cluster can be found in Table 3. 
 
5.1        S&P500 
 
The  results  obtained  in  this  study  suggest    that  there  is  indeed  significant  negative  reaction  (p-
value<0.01) in shareholders wealth to the announcement made by companies that are not listed in 
S&P500  index.  This  confirms  our  expectations  on  agency  cost  theory  and  uncertainty  of  the 
proposed strategy success among the investors. More precisely, it suggests that even if some cash 
flows will be obtained due to the investment, market participants concerns about reasonability of 
this strategy outweight the supposable future profitability. This might imply, that investors find such 
action rather as a signal of inefficient investment, than as a progressive marketing strategy. 
 
The expected positive effect on company's value for S&P500 components did not prove itself, being 
rejected by the test. They seem to be rather confident that the strategy will not depress the value of 
the company, proving our expectation of trust to S&P500 company's decision, while still having the 
lack of high awareness in the big success of such deal. It might imply, that the rate of participation 
in  such  deals  in  the  past  being  40%  is  still  not  enough  to  encourage  investors  completely.  This 
might mean that investors do not find this deal as changing company's prosperity in either positive 
or  negative  way.  Rather,  the  costs  associated  with  the  investment  are  expected  to  be  covered  by 
future benefits.  
 
The  hypothesis  of  abnormal  returns  being  significantly  higher  for  S&P500  components  then 
S&P500  non-components  is  not  rejected  (p-value<0.01),  suggesting  that,  eventhough  the  overall 
impact of S&P500 returns are not significantly higher than zero, investors react significantly better 
to the new strategy announcement by S&P500 component than S&P500 non-components.  
 

 
 
 

37 

5.2       PRICE OF DEAL-TO-CAPACITY 
 
The results obtained suggest not rejecting the null hypothesis for all companies except those with 
the  middle  price  of  naming  rights-to-capacity  of  stadium  ratio.  This  supports  what  we  expected 
earlier. The fact that neutral reaction is observed for low and high ratios, while the negative reaction 
in stocks, associated with middle level of costs paid per seat, is significant (p<0.05), seems to be 
constistent  with  'stuck-in-the-middle'  theory.  That  might  confirm,  that  investors  indeed  perceive 
such characteristics of deal as the signal of lack of target policy. The absence of clear path implies 
that managers are uncertain about what actions should be undertaken, and try to avoid bad outcome 
by  chosing  the  middle  one.  Consequently,  such  move  brings  the  worst  results,  as  it  is  neither 
directed to effect certain type of customers, nor is a cheap trial.  
 
In this case, while low price of the deal relative to capacity may be signal of strategy to have small 
costs and receive some benefits from higher exposure, large price of deal relative to capacity might 
be accepted as a sound and progressive marketing step, the middle ones seem to be confusing in 
their aim to investors. The lack of clear goal they perceive seem to impact their market participants 
beliefs of company's performance in a depressing way. 
 
5.3      SECTOR 
 
Classification by sectors gave interesting insights. The companies connected to brewing and food 
industry  experience    strong  benefitial  effect  on  shareholders  wealth  after  the  announcement 
(p<0.01),  rejecting  the  null  hypothesis  of  no  effect. Also,  the  results  show  negative  reaction  to 
similar activity in financial sector (p<0.01) as well as neutral impact in industries defined as 'others' 
(p>0.05): electric utility, airlines, cable providers, telecommunication, etc. Furthermore, the impact 
of  announcement  is  significantly  higher  for  beer  and  food  industry  in  comparison  to  both  the 
financial sector (p<0.01) and 'others' (p<0.05).  
 
This confirms the previously outlined expectations.  Investors do acknowledge the opportunity  of 
exploitation  by  brewing  and  food  industry  to  be  wider  than  for  other  sectors.  The  fact  that  this 
industry can observe very direct and immediate  change in sales encourages investors. They realise 
that the contract is favourable to this type of company and should be expected to yield profitability, 
as well as brand awareness due to traditional compatibility of beer and fans. Moreover, the sector is 

 
 
 

38 

absolute leader among the rest, showing significantly more benefitial reactions then both of other 
sectos in this study. 
 
On the contrary, the financial's sector dealership does not seem to satisfy the public. This might be a 
confirmation of the fact, that such marketing strategy is not clear to investors neither in direct, nor 
in  indirect  measure. The  sales  within  stadium  cannot  surge  drastically,  while  the  combination  of 
sport and finance as an ideology does not seem to outweight that. Moreover,  financial institutions 
pay on average $4.2 million for the contract annualy, while 'others' pay on average $2.2 million, 
beer and food - $1.45 million. By observing this acquisition as an investment, the higher average 
payment combined with uncertain future cash flows make people expect negative NPV, and, thus, 
lead to negative impact. 
 
The  'other'  sector  shows  neutral  expectations,  which  might  mean  that,  indeed,  more  optimistic 
expectations about the exploitation rate of stadium, but still no revolutionary success is expected. At 
more precise look at the companies which make this sector,  47% seem to be able to involve in 
higher sales (telecommunications, IT, cable provider, construction), while the rest does not suggest 
the same (courier service, self-care, airlines,automobile industry). This might be the reason why the 
overall reaction is out-weighted to neutral. 
 
5.4         CAPACITY 
 
This factor shows non-rejection of hypothesis of insignificant returns for companies acquiring high 
capacity  stadium.  However,  low  capacity  acquisition  does  have  larger  magnitude  of  impact, 
favouring the hypothesis of negative reaction (p-value<0.05).  
 
As was expected, the low capacity might raise scepticism in investors attitute. This could happen 
because  the  low  capacity  stadiums  are  of  limited  nature,  even  if  they  are  applicable  to  different 
events.  The  concerts,  festivals  and  games  provided  by  them  cannot  have  the  same  resonanse  as 
those provided by 90 000 seats facilities. However, as it was previously outlined, numerous small 
stadiums are paid almost as high as very large ones. Hence, shareholders feel negative impact on 
their  wealth  due  to  market's  perception  of  such  deal  as  of  unreasonably  costly  with  respect  to 
benefits they are able to bring. The contract might be found as inadequate estimation by manager 
rather than implementation of successful policy. 

 
 
 

39 

 
The insignificance of the large capacity acquistion was surprising result. This figure might suggest 
that beliefs about future benefits are on average outweighted by cost of deal. The price of stadium's 
title  does      rapidly  increase  with  time,  because  they  are  of  limited  supply,  but  rising  demand. 
Consequently,  some  stadiums  are  extremely  expensive,  for  example,  MetLife  Stadium  receiving 
$17  million  per  annum.  Such  considerable  year  payment  might  be  perceived  by  investors  as 
unreasonably high price which will not exploit even large events revenues, due to covering their 
annual  costs.  Consequently,  eventhough  they  might  bring  large  benefits  they  are  also  often 
associated with huge costs, investors seem to react neutrally to these sound announcements and it 
might be caused by too high prices paid for the deal. 
 
5.5         LEVEL OF TEAM LEAGUE 
 
The obtained p-values suggest that while companies which participate in acquisition of university 
league do not obtain significant effect, they tend to outperform the major league (p-value<0.05). 
Moreover, major league contracts show negative reaction to the announcement (p<0.01). Though 
quite surprising result for major league, the highlightened importance in charitable activity in USA 
and CANADA seems to have impact.  
 
The perception of announcement associated with University League occurs neutral. This suggests 
that the investors value it as zero NPV prohect. The charitable payments are expected to be equally 
outweighted  with  increased  awereness  of  stability.  The  signalling  effect  does  not  seem  to  be 
radically  persuasive,  but  still  suggests  comforting  impression  among  the  investors.  No  threats  in 
company's  value  is  expected,  while  no  rapid  increase  in  profitability  is  observed  as  well.  This 
suggests charity to be a a signal, which covers it's expenditures. 
 
 As  for  major  league  stadiums,  the  negative  rection  suggest  disturbing  reaction.  As,  initially,  it 
would be reasonable to expect major league to affect positively, this result might suggest that too 
many  of  such  acquisitions  where  already  made  and  some  are  showing  very  unsatisfactory 
experience. There are numerous examples of scandals occuring after such deal. For example, CMGI 
Inc. purchased title rights for the home field of NFL team in 2000 and did not even make until the 
first big game due to bankrupcy. PSINet Stadium did the same with NFL team in 1999 and after 2 
years taken off the stadium's logo due to bankrupcy as well. Another NHL stadium experienced the 

 
 
 

40 

same within 3 years of contract in case of ANC Rental company. These are only 3  out of numerous 
examples, CNNMoney suggests that 62% of sponsors had observed huge fluctuations in value over 
the last year.This does not mean that the company is cursed to become bankrupcy, but people might 
connect that as cause-and-effect relationship. Consequently, eventhough there might be no evidence 
to do so, they might believe in increased probability of getting bankrupt in the near future due to the 
shocking examples they know.  
 
5.6           K-MEANS CLUSTERS RESULTS 
 
This study implies three k-mean clusterization. Observations were numerized according to cluster it 
belongs  to  and  can  be  viewed  in  Table  3,  along  with  other  classifications,  in  Appendix.  The 
following centroids were obtained: 

  Cluster  

1 
2 
3 

  Centroid 
-0.0067  
0.0110  
-0.0284  

        
                     Table 4.   Clusters and corresponding centroids by k-mean clusterisation 
 
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney  test  showed  the  following  results  on  significance  of  cluster's  abnormal 
returns: cluster 1 showed significant negative reaction in stock prices (p=0.0000), cluster 2 showed 
significant positive  reaction (p=0.0000), cluster 3 showed signifant negative reaction (p=0.0112). 
Next,  abnormal  returns  of  cluster  2  are  significantly  greater  than  abnormal  returns  in  cluster  1 
(p=0.0000) and cluster 3 (p=0.0000). Furthermore, abnormal returns of cluster 3 are significantly 
greater  than  abnormal  returns  of  cluster  1  (p=0.0136).  This  suggests  that  cluster  2  experiences 
positive impact, cluster 3 middle impact, cluster 1 the largest negative impact. The table of p-values 
can be observed in Table 5 in Appendix. 
 
Thus, three clusters with minimized within-cluster sum of squares show that the announcement of 
acquisition  of  naming  rights  is  significant.  By  cathegorizing  abnormal  returns  to  three  groups 
according to their performance, not to their contract's characteristics difference, their significance 
showed that indeed the effect to announcement exists, but is prone to numerous factors rather than 
one separately.  
 
 
 
 

41 

5.7         THE QUETLET INDEX 
 
By devoting companies to clusters according to their closest centroid and observing significant but 
differently directed effects, the next step is to find the relationship between previously determined 
clusters with clusters defined by k-means. Results will enable to see the change in probability of 
being  in  the  successful  cluster  (cluster  2)  with  each  characteristic  defined  earlier  (S&P500 
component, high capacity, etc). Mirkin (2011) defines Quetlet index as strategy for visualization of 
correlation patterns without removing the 'non-fitting' entities (Mirkin, 2011). In other words, the 
next step results show conditional probabilities by Quetelet index. The results are presented in the 
Table 6 in Appendix.   
 
The results obtained by separating each factor from others gave insights on how investors react to 
ceratin characteristics of contract separately. Analyzing  the factors separately evidenced different 
directions and magnitudes of expectations, depending on various possible psychological concepts 
underlining the reaction. Nevertheless, investors are rarely observing each factor separately, rather, 
they accept the announcement as a combination of information about those factors. More precisely, 
each  factor  separately  influences  his  opinion,  but  one  might  be  outweighted  by  another  in  their 
combination.  
 
5.8       STRATEGY FOR FUTURE CONTRACTS 
 
Observing  the  results  and  keeping  in  mind  the  gradation  of  goodness  of  clusters,  the  following 
advices  can  be  formed  for  companies,  which  are  considering  the  acquisition  of  stadium  naming 
rights: 
 

•  Not being the company listed in S&P500 index cuts down the  probability of occuring in the 
positive  reaction  group  by  100%.  Moreover,  it  is  associated  with  43%  higher  chance  to 
become part of the worst negative reaction cluster. The figures suggest that non-components 
of S&P500 index should be highly sceptical about takeing part in such deal. 

On  the  contrary,  strong  evidence  of  50%  higher  likelihood  of  the  successful  naming  right  deal 
occures for S&P500 index components. It is further supported by decline in probability of occuring 
in any cluster with negative reaction, showing high potential of participating in the dealership. 

•  The middle price of naming rights-to-capacity ratio is highly recommended to be avoided, 
42 

 
 
 

as such characteristics of contract enhances probability of occuring in the negative reaction 
group by 80%. Other two ratios are quite neutral, but more promising, as they do not imply 
high likelihood of negative returns. So, the non-middle ratios are suggested. 

•  Beer and Food sectors are highly recommended to motivate naming rights contracts, as they 
almost  guarantee  to  have  positive  effect:  200%  increase  in  likelihood  of  experiencing 
wealth-enhancing  reaction. The  probability  of  unfavourable  effect  decreases  by  100%  for 
such company, implying that  huge benefits can be extracter from such deal.  

Financial sector should, on the contrary, place high doubts on the success of the deal: being in this 
industry enhances likelihood of observing the worst negative reaction by 40%, while decreases the 
possibility to enter either of two more favourable clusters by more than 44%. 
Being the 'other' sector participant, it is 56% more likely to get into middle reaction cluster, which is 
not highly recommended, but is not a run-away situation either. 

•  Small capacity in the contract is almost predetermined to lack of success: this characteristics 
of deal enhances  likelihood of experiencing the dramatic negative stock effect by 17 per 
cent, while makes fitting two other more favourable clusters  20% less likely to happen. 

High  capacity  tends  to  direct  the  impact  towards  two  most  favourable  clusters,  implying  20% 
enhanced probability of achieving positive investor's reaction and 16% secured probability of not 
entering the worst scenario case. Large capacity is, thus, unquestinably more preferable. 

•  The  contract  associated  with  football  drives  the  deal  towards  the  depressing  effect, 
increasing the probability of its' occurance by 16% and decreasing the probability of good 
effect scenario by 25%. Very depressing result suggests that football is highly recommended 
to  be  excluded  from  the  list  of  deals.  Hockey  shows  quite  unpromising  results  as  well, 
pointing towards the worst negative effect cluster. Basketball seems to drive the company to 
experiencing  stable  middle  effect  by  123%,  while  baseball  promises  the  most  welfare-
enhancing results by increase in probability of fitting the successful cluster by 17%. 

Consequently,  football  is  recommended  to  be  avoided,  while  the  best  scenario  can  happen    in 
baseball contracts, so company should probably aim for that. 

•  The involvement with National League is shown to be for risk-lovers: the deal equally likely 
places the outcome either in the most successful cluster or in the most depressing cluster, 
avoiding the middle one. At the same time, the University League increases probability of 
obtaining the middle reaction by 109% stabily. This suggests that National League is a risky 
project,  which  can  bring  very  favourable  but  at  the  same  time  the  worst  results,  while 
University  League  is  more  considered  as  a  less  profitable  but  at  the  same  time  less 
43 

 
 
 

fluctuative investment opportunity. 

High 

Baseball 

S&P500Comp

onent 

Brewing,Food  

Industry 

S&P500NON 

Component 

Capacity  
Stadium 

 
Consequently,  placing  different  weights  on  factors,  according  to  the  magnitude  of  change  in 
probability  of  achieving  success  they  bring,  the  companies  can  evalue  are  they  more  likely  to 
achieve the welfare-enhancement or the opposite effect.  
 
The deal is most likely to become welfare-enhancing if  the following characterists can be attributed 
to it: 
 
 
 
 
 
The deal is most likely to become a failure, if the following characteristics can be attributed to it: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The best and the worst set of characteristics for naming rights deal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Small 
Capacity 
Stadium 

Financial 
Sector 

Football 

 
 
 

44 

6.     CONCLUSIONS  
 
The performed study suggest that absence inclusion of various firm-specific factors was indeed the 
cause  of  insignificant  results  of  the  announcement  and  consequent  paradoxal  conclusions.  The 
results  obtained  confirm  that  the  naming  rights  sponsorship  impact  significantly  shareholders' 
wealth at the date of the announcement of this new strategy. The direction and magnitude differened 
among  the  results,  but  that  was  expected:  various  factors  tend  to  signal  to  investor  various 
conclusions. 
 
In  general, the significant results were obtained within each the  cluster, though some were quite 
surprising.  We  can  observe  an  overall  tendency  of  companies  non-listed  in  S&P500  to  cause 
disbelief in such strategy and perception of that as a inefficient management. Furthermore, it seems 
like middle price of naming rights to capacity   ratio is perceived by investors as a bad signal of 
company's stability and reasonability of such investment. Interesting insight is caused by the fact, 
that football tends to perceive market participants the contract as a possible threat to company. The 
definite  leader  of  the  positive  significant  performance  is  Beer  and  Food  industry,  whose  results 
suggest strong abnormal positive returns in the day of announcement. As for Financial sector the 
opposite is true, meaning that investors do not see the reason for  the success of such marketing 
strategy. The  involvement  with  major  league  seems  to  have  unexpected  negative  result,  showing 
sceptical attitude towards such new strategy. 
 
The K-mean clustering method enables determination of cluster and their abnormal returns without 
any  predetermined  pattern  by  the  researcher.  Such  clusters  show  undoubtedly  significant  results, 
where secont cluster tends to experience significant positive reaction, while two others significant 
negative  but  in  differenct  magnitude  reaction.  Further,  the  Quetelet  index  showed  how  each 
characteristics affects the probability of becoming a part of successful or less successful industies.  
 
The  results  enabled  to  form  the  advice  for  future  contracts.  It  implies  that  several  factors  are 
strongly weighted in investors multi-criterial approach to the evaluation of success, while some are 
less  crutial.  Considering  the  probabilities  of  becoming  a  part  of  successful,  medium  and  least 
promising cluster,  I highlightened the most weighted characteristics which companies whould be 
aware of before they enter such dealership. Following the suggested strategy significantly increases 
their probability of experiencing positive impact, especially if all the proposed characteristics are 

 
 
 

45 

followed. As such, the leader in naming rights contract should be S&P500 index participant from 
Beear and Food industry, buying large stadium for baseball. While the 'run-away' situation if the 
company has the following set of characteristics: non-component of S&P500 index, from Financial 
sector, small stadium focused on football activities. 
 
This  study  yields  deeper  insight  on  how  the  reactions  are  split  up  between  different  factors. 
Nevertheless,  the  realistic  approach  of  investor  as  a  multi-criterial  decision-maker  enabled  to 
determine  the  weights  he  puts  on  the  information  and  use  it  for  developing  the  future  contracts 
advice.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

46 

LIST OF REFERENCE: 
 

1.  Abrahamson,L.Rosenkopf  (1993):'Institutional  and  Competitive  Bandwagons:Using  Mathematical 
Modeling as a Tool to Explore the Innovation Diffusion', Academy of Management Review, Vol.18, 
№3, p. 487-547  

2.  Agrawal,  W.Kamakura  (1995):  'The  Economic  Worth  of  Celebrity  Endorsers:  An  Event  Study 

Analysis', Journal of Marketing, Vol. 59, No.3, p. 56-62 

3.  Amis, B.Cornwell (2005): 'Global Sport Sponsorship', Berg, Oxford 
4.  Ashley and J. Ohara (2001): 'Valuing Naming Rights', Working Paper, University of Nebraskap. 
5.  Binder (1998): 'The Event Study Methodology Since 1969', Review of Quantitative Financing and 

Accounting, 11,p. 111-137 

6.  Brown  (2011):  'Effective,  creative  activation  gives  naming  rights  more  impact',  Sports  Business 

Journal, p. 32 

7.  Brown,  J.  Warner  (1985):  'Using  Daily  Stock  Returns:  The  Case  of  Event  Studies,  Journal  of 

Financial Economics 14, (1985), p. 3- 31, North-Holland 

8.  Clark,  T.Lachowetz,  R.Irwin  and  K.Schimmel  (2003):  'Business-to-Business  Relationship  with 
Sports:  using  sponsorship as  a  critical sales  event',  International Journal  of  Sports Marketing  and 
Sponsorship, 5, p.129-144 

9.  Clark,  T.  Cornwell,  S.Pruitt  (2002):  'Corporate  Stadium  Sponsorships,  Signaling  Theory, Agency 

Conflicts and Shareholder Wealth', Journal of Advertising Research, Nov. 2002 

10. Cornwell  and  I.Maignan  (1998),  'An  International  Review  of  Sponsorship  Research',  Journal  of 

Advertising, Vol. 24, №1, p.12 

11. Cowan (1992): 'Non parametric event study tests', Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting 

2,343 358 

12. Crabtree (2013): 'Cleveland Brown to Sell Naming Rights to Stadium', NBC News, 15 January 2013 
13. DiMaggio, W.Powell (1983):'The  Iron  Cage  Revisited  ():Institutional  Isomorphism  and  Collective 

Rationality in Organizational Fields', American Sociological Review, Vol.48, Iss.2, 147-160 

14. Drake  (2010):  'The  Basics  of  Finance:An  Introduction  to  Financial  Markets',  Business 

Finance and Portfolio Management, 2010, p.32 

15. Fama (1991): 'Efficial Capital Markets:II', The Journal of Finance , Vol.46, №5, p. 1575-1617 
16. Fama, L. Fisher, M. Jensen, R. Roll (1969): 'The Adjustment of Stock Prices to New Information', 

International Economic Review, Vol. 10, 1-27 

17. Fama  (1976):'Foundations of  Finance: Portfolio  Decisions  and  Security  Price',  Basic  Books,  New 

Tork, 2976 

18. Finkel (2011): 'NFL Stadiums with the most expensive naming rights', Bloomberg Businessweek, 23 

August 2011 

 
 
47 

19. Friedman (1937): 'The Use of Ranks to Avoid Assumption of Normality Implicit in the Analysis of 

Varience', Journal of Americal Statistical Association, Vol.32, №200,p.675-701 

20. Gardner  and  P.Shuman  (1998):  'Sponsorships  and  Small  Businesses',  Journal  of  Small  Business 

management, 44-53 

21. Henry,  Michael  R.  King,  'The  Efficiency  of  Canadian  Capital  Market:  Some  Bank  of  Canada 

Research', 2004 

22. Howard and I.Crompton (2004): 'Financing Sport', 2nd edition, Fitness Information Technology 
23. IMR Sports Marketing and Sponsorship Intelligence, 'Sponsorship Today', 2050-4888 
24. Jarell,  J.Brickley,  J.  Netter  (1988):  'The  Market  for  Corporate  Control:  The  Empirical  Evidence 

Since 1980', Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol.2, №1, p.49-68 

25. Jensen;  W.  Meckling  (1976).  "Theory  of  the  Firm:  Managerial  Behavior,  Agency  Costs  and 

Ownership Structure". Journal of Financial Economics 3 (4): 305–360 

26. Kishner  and  J.Albinsky  (2011):'Best  Practises  For  Negotiating  Naming  Rights  and  Sponsorship 

Deals', Professional Sports and the Law, June 2011, Vol.2, Iss. 2 

27. Luo (2012): 'The Impact of Natural Disasters on Global Stock Market: The Case of the Japanese 

2011 Earthquake', Working Paper, Saint Mary's University 

28. Li  (2007):  'The  Impact  of  Mega  Sporting  Events  on  Stock  Markets',  Auckland  University  of 

Technology 

29. McCarthy and R.Irwin (2000): 'An examination of rationale and motives for corporate purchase of 

stadia and arena naming rights', Cyber Journal of Sport Marketing, iss.1327-6816 

30. Porter (1980): 'Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing  Industries And Competitors', New 

York, Free Press,1980 

31. MacQueen  (1967):  'Some  methods  for  classification  and  analysis  of  multivariate  observations', 
Proceeding of the Fifth Barkley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, p.281- 297, 
University of California Press 

32. McWilliams  amd  D.  Siegel  (1997):  'Event  Studies  in  Management  Research:  Theoretical  and 

Empirical Issues', Academy of Management Journal, 1997,Vol.40, #3, p. 626 

33. Mirkin  (2011): 

'Core  Concept  in  Data  Analysis:Summarization,  Correlation,  Vizualization'; 
Sprinnger, LondonMarch, J. Olsen (1976): 'Ambiguity and Choice in Organizations', Working Paper, 
Stanford University 

34. Porter (1980): 'Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing  Industries And Competitors', New 

York, Free Press,1980 

35. Ruback, M.Jensen (1983): 'The Market for Corporate Control: The Scientific Evidence', Journal of 

Financial Economics, Vol.11, p.5-50 

36. Sports  Business:  Professional  Sports,  List  of  Sports  Venues  with  Sole  Naming  Rights, 

Financial History of the New York Giants 

 
 
48 

APPENDIX 
 
Table 1. List of companies and relevant data  for the study. 
 

Stadium 

Company 

Announcement 

Date 

Capacity 

 Annual Price, $ 

Air Canada 
Bank of Montreal 
IGM Financial 
Rogers Communication 
Bank of Nova Scotia 
Bank of Nova Scotia 
Alerus Financial 
AT&T 
AT&T 
Bank of America 
BB&T Corporation 
BOK Financial Corporation 
Bridgestone 
Citigroup 
Molson Coors Brewing Comp. 
FedEx  
H. J. Heinz Company 
FedEx  
Dick's Sporting Goods 
First Energy 
Ford Motor Company 
AT&T 
Yum!Brands 
Lincoln National Corporation 
Louisiana-Pacific Corporation 
M&T Bank 
Daimler AG 
MetLife 
Oracle Corporation 
PNC Financial Services 
PNC Financial Services 
Progressive Insuarance 
Qualcomm 
Raymond James Financial 
Sun Life Financial 
Target Corporation 
Time Warner Cable 
TD Ameritrade 
US Cellular 
 

15/02/07 
31/08/06 
14/12/11 
01/06/05 
11/01/06 
07/10/10 
22/06/95 
04/04/96 
20/07/00 
27/06/96 
05/09/07 
27/10/05 
23/02/10 
13/11/06 
12/06/05 
18/11/99 
25/06/01 
16/10/02 
08/10/06 
14/01/13 
11/10/96 
26/08/00 
19/04/10 
03/06/02 
06/06/06 
06/05/03 
03/11/11 
27/06/11 
20/10/06 
09/06/11 
06/08/98 
11/01/08 
17/07/97 
26/06/98 
18/01/10 
19/09/11 
08/04/08 
08/06/09 
31/01/03 

 
 
 
 

20 000 
22 000 
40 000 
49 280 
20 500 
19 290 
21 000 
41 915 
18 580 
73 780 
31 500 
19 200 
19 400 
41 920 
50 480 
85 000 
65 050 
18 120 
18 090 
73 200 
65 000 
60 860 
22 090 
68 530 
69 140 
71 000 
55 000 
80 570 
19 590 
19 770 
38 360 
42 870 
70 560 
65 860 
80 120 
19 360 
20 200 
24 505 
40 615 

 
 

AIR CANADA ARENA 
BMO FIELD 
INVESTORS GROUP FIELD 
ROGERS CENTRE 
SCOTIABANK PLACE 
SCOTIABANK 
SADDLEDOME 
ALERUS CENTER 
AT&T PARK 
AT&T CENTER 
BANK OF AMERICA 
STADIUM 
BB&T FIELD 
BOK CENTER 
BRIDGESTONE ARENA 
CITI FIELD 
COORS FIELD 
FEDEXFIELD 
HEINZ FIELD 
FEDEXFORUM 
DICKS SPORTING GOODS 
PARK 
FIRST ENERGY STADIUM 
FORD FIELD 
JONES AT&T STADIUM 
KFC YUM! CENTER 
LINCOLN FINANCIAL FIELD 
LP FIELD 
M&T BANK STADIUM 
MERCEDES-BENZ 
SUPERDOME 
METLIFE STADIUM 
ORACLE ARENA 
PNC ARENA 
PNC PARK 
PROGRESSIVE FIELD 
QUALCOMM STADIUM 
RAYMOND JAMES 
STADIUM 
SUN LIFE STADIUM 
TARGET CENTER 
TIME WARNER CABLE 
ARENA 
TD AMERITRAD PARK 
OMAHA 
U.S. CELLULAR FIELD 
 

 

 
 
49 

2 000 000 
2 700 000 
1 500 000 
250 000 
1 330 000 
1 200 000 
150 000 
2 080 000 
2 050 000 
2 000 000 
3 500 000 
550 000 
2 500 000 
20 000 000 

150 000 
7 600 000 
2 850 000 
4 500 000 
2 000 000 
6 000 000 
2 000 000 
4 000 000 
1 350 000 
6 650 000 
3 000 000 
5 000 000 
5 000 000 
17 000 000 
3 000 000 
4 000 000 
1 500 000 

3 600 

1 060 000 

2 500 
7 500 

5 000 000 
1 010 000 
750 000 
2 960 000 

 
 

 
 
Table 2. List of companies and their corresponding clusters. 
 

STADIUM NAME
AIR CANADA ARENA
BMO FIELD
INVESTORS GROUP FIELD
ROGERS CENTRE
SCOTIABANK PLACE
SCOTIABANK SADDLEDOME
ALERUS CENTER
AT&T PARK
AT&T CENTER
BANK OF AMERICA STADIUM
BB&T FIELD
BOK CENTER
BRIDGESTONE ARENA
CITI FIELD
COORS FIELD
FEDEXFIELD
HEINZ FIELD
FEDEXFORUM
DICKS SPORTING GOODS PARK
FIRST ENERGY STADIUM
FORD FIELD
JONES AT&T STADIUM
KFC YUM! CENTER
LINCOLN FINANCIAL FIELD
LP FIELD
M&T BANK STADIUM
MERCEDES-BENZ SUPERDOME
METLIFE STADIUM
ORACLE ARENA
PNC ARENA
PNC PARK
PROGRESSIVE FIELD
QUALCOMM STADIUM
RAYMOND JAMES STADIUM
SUN LIFE STADIUM
TARGET CENTER
TIME WARNER CABLE ARENA
TD AMERITRAD PARK OMAHA
U.S. CELLULAR FIELD

T=0

T=+1

K-MEANS

S&P500

-0,00190
0,00367
-0,00001
-0,01580
0,00380
0,00221
0,00008
-0,02034
-0,02034
0,00902
0,00098
-0,00352
0,00855
-0,00098
0,01874
-0,00287
-0,01108
-0,00769
0,01929
-0,00839
0,00192
0,00911
-0,00493
0,00618
-0,01978
-0,00785
0,01525
-0,00455
0,00276
-0,00996
-0,00488
-0,01227
-0,02761
0,00542
0,01410
0,00797
0,00992
0,02080
-0,00031

-0,00516
-0,00629
-0,01345
-0,00168
-0,00081
-0,01543
-0,00017
0,00716
0,00716
0,01062
0,00830
0,00144
-0,00105
-0,00433
0,00250
-0,02410
0,01487
0,00830
-0,00468
0,01029
0,02482
0,01926
0,00234
-0,01701
-0,01998
-0,00305
-0,02918
-0,00302
0,00105
0,01665
-0,01111
-0,01102
0,01038
-0,01026
-0,01699
-0,00823
-0,02215
-0,04634
-0,00888

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
3
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
3
1
3
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
3
3
1

CAPAC.

PR/CAP

0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0

SECT.

1
2
0
0
1
1
0
1
2
0
2
0
2
2
0
2
1
2
2
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
2
1
0
1

0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
2
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
2
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0

0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1

SPORT

LEAGUE

3
1
2
0
1
1
2
1
3
2
0
0
1
0
0
2
0
0
0
2
0
0
3
2
0
2
3
2
3
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1

The list of descriptions of clusters: 

SECT

MIDDLE
LOW
BEER, FOOD
FINANCIAL
OTHERS

K-MEANS Centroid 1
Centroid 2
Centroid 3
YES
NO

S&P500

PR/CAPAC. HIGH

SPORT

CAPACITY HIGH
LOW
BASKETBALL
FOOTBALL
ICE HOCKEY
BASEBALL
NATIONAL 
UNIVERSITY

LEAGUE

 
 
 
 
 

-0.0067  
0.0110  
-0.0284 

1
0
2
1
0
2
1
0
1
0
3
2
1
0
1
0

 
 
50 

S&P500

AR(0)>NR(0)
NR(0)>AR(0)
AR(1)>NR(0)
NR(1)>AR(0)
AR(0)>AR(1)
AR(1)>AR(0)

MWW
P-value
1.0000
0.0000
0.2546
0.7468
0.9968
0.0032

MWW
P-value
0.9679
0.0324
0.9233
0.0774
0.6091
0.3924

CAPACITY
AR(0)>NR(0)
NR(0)>AR(0)
AR(1)>NR(0)
NR(1)>AR(0)
AR(0)>AR(1)
AR(1)>AR(0)

TYPE 

 
 
 
 
Table 3. Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney one-sided test P-values for clusters by characteristics of contract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AR(0)>NR(0)
NR(0)>AR(0)
AR(1)>NR(0)
NR(1)>AR(0)
AR(2)>NR(0)
NR(2)>AR(0)
AR(3)>NR(0)
NR(3)>AR(0)
AR(0)>AR(1)
AR(0)>AR(2)
AR(0)>AR(3)
AR(1)>AR(0)
AR(1)>AR(2)
AR(1)>AR(3)
AR(2)>AR(0)
AR(2)>AR(1)
AR(2)>AR(3)
AR(3)>AR(0)
AR(3)>AR(1)
AR(3)>AR(2)

SECTOR
AR(0)>NR(0)
NR(0)>AR(0)
AR(1)>NR(0)
NR(1)>AR(0)
AR(2)>NR(0)
NR(2)>AR(0)
AR(0)>AR(1)
AR(0)>AR(2)
AR(1)>AR(1)
AR(1)>AR(2)
AR(2)>AR(0)
AR(2)>AR(1)

0.7738
0.2276
0.8862
0.1154
0.9831
0.0173
0.7129
0.2896
0.5857
0.3195
0.5458
0.4161
0.1850
0.6062
0.6822
0.8166
0.8541
0.4559
0.3961
0.1472

PR/CAP

AR(0)>NR(0)
NR(0)>AR(0)
AR(1)>NR(0)
NR(0)>AR(1)
AR(2)>NR(0)
NR(0)>AR(2)
AR(0)>AR(1)
AR(0)>AR(2)
AR(1)>AR(1)
AR(1)>AR(2)
AR(2)>AR(0)
AR(2)>AR(1)

LEAGUE

AR(0)>NR(0)
NR(0)>AR(0)
AR(1)>NR(0)
NR(1)>AR(0)
AR(0)>AR(1)
AR(1)>AR(0)

0.7968
0.2047
0.9835
0.0167
0.8123
0.1893
0.1811
0.5356
0.8200
0.8425
0.4661
0.1585

0.9244
0.0762
0.9992
0.0008
0.0031
0.9970
0.2449
0.9763
0.7563
0.9998
0.0240
0.0002

0.5014
0.5014
0.9974
0.0027
0.0105
0.9897

 
 
51 

 
 
 
Table 5. K-Means clusters p-values 

P-value
AR(1)>NR(0) 1.0000
AR(1)<NR(0) 0.0000 
AR(2)>NR(0) 0.0000 
AR(2)<NR(0) 1.0000
AR(3)>NR(0) 0.9895
AR(3)<NR(0) 0.0112
AR(1)>AR(2) 1.0000
AR(1)>AR(3) 0.9868
AR(2)>AR(1) 0.0000 
AR(2)>AR(3) 0.0000 
AR(3)>AR(1) 0.0136
AR(3)>AR(2) 1.0000

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Table 6        The Quetelet index results. 

K-MEANS CLUS.SNP500=0

SNP500 = 1 PR/CAP=0

1
2
3

1
2
3

 
 
 

 
 
52 

0,43
-1
0,8

-0,21
0,5
-0,4

SECT=0

PR/CAP=1

-0,14
-0,08
0,8

PR/CAP=2

0,08
0
-0,35

-0,16
0,05
0,56

SECT=1

0,39
-0,44
-0,51

SECT=2

-1
2
-1

0,06
0,07
-0,44

K-MEANS CLUS.CAPAC=0

CAPAC=1

-0,16
0,2
0,17

SPORT=0

-0,07
0,17
-0,13

SPORT=1

0,24
0
-1

SPORT=2

0,16
-0,25
-0,02

SPORT=3

-0,2
-0,14
1,23

LEAGUE=0

-0,27
-0,19
1,09

LEAGUE=1

0,07
0,05
-0,28

0,17
-0,21
-0,18

